At nine o'clock, ship's time, I made my way to the launching pad. Around the shaft, the men lined up to let me pass; I climbed down the ladder and entered the capsule. In the narrow cabin I could hardly spread my elbows. I attached the pump hose to the valve of my suit, which quickly inflated. I could no longer make the slightest movement; I was standing, or rather hanging, wrapped in my air suit and embedded in the metal shell. I looked up; above the transparent globe I saw a smooth wall and, at the very top, Moddard's head, bent over the opening of the well. Moddard disappeared, it was suddenly night; the heavy protective cone had been put in place. I heard, eight times over, the hum of the electric motors turning the nuts, then the hiss of compressed air in the dampers. My eyes were getting used to the darkness; I could make out the phosphorescent frame of the single meter. A voice echoed through the headphones: "Ready, Kelvin? I replied: "Ready, Moddard. - Don't worry about a thing," he said. The Station will pick you up in flight. Have a safe trip! There was a creak, the capsule wobbled. Almost in spite of myself, I tensed my muscles. There was no other sound, no other movement. - When will it leave?" I asked. I heard a rustle outside - like a shower of fine sand.

- You're on your way, Kelvin, good luck!" replied Moddard's voice, as close as before. A slit opened wide at my eye level and I saw the stars. The Prometheus was sailing around the Alpha of Aquarius, but I tried in vain to orient myself. The porthole was filled with sparkling dust; I did not recognise any constellations; the sky in this part of the Galaxy was alien to me. I waited for the moment when I would pass close to the first distinct star; I was unable to isolate any of them. Their brightness diminished; they faded into a vague purple glow. I became aware of the distance I had travelled. My body stiffened, squeezed by my pneumatic envelope, and I split the space, with the impression of remaining immobile in the void and with the only diversion being the heat that was slowly, gradually rising. Suddenly there was a crunch, a sour sound, like the rubbing of a steel blade on a wet glass plate. And then it was a fall. If the jumping numbers in the meter light hadn't warned me, I wouldn't have noticed the change in direction; the stars long gone, the gaze lost, again and again, in the pale red light of infinity. I could hear my heart beating heavily. On the back of my neck I could feel the cool breath of the air-conditioner, but my face was on fire. I was sorry I had not seen the Prometheus; it must have been out of sight when the automatic controls had pushed the window shutter aside. A jolt shook the capsule, another jolt followed; the vehicle began to vibrate. The vibration penetrated the layers of insulation, penetrated my pneumatic envelope and spread to my whole body; the phosphorescent frame of the counter spread in all directions. I ignored the fear. I had not undertaken this long journey to go astray! I called: - Solaris Station! Solaris Station, Solaris Station! I think I'm going off course, pull me up! Solaris Station, this is the capsule from the Prometheus. Come in, Solaris, go ahead!

I had missed the precious moment of the planet's appearance! It stretched out before my eyes, already immense and flat; yet, from the appearance of its surface, I judged that I was still far away. Or, more exactly, that I was still very high, since I had passed the imperceptible boundary from which the distance separating us from a celestial body is measured in terms of altitude. I was falling. Now, even when I closed my eyes, I could feel the fall. I hurriedly lifted my eyelids, for I didn't want to miss any more of what there was to see. I waited for a minute in silence, then I started calling again. There was no answer. In the headphones, crackling sounds came in bursts, against a background of low, deep rumour, which I imagined to be the very voice of the planet. A veil covered the orange sky and the window darkened; instinctively I crouched down, as much as my pneumatic suit would allow; almost immediately I realised that I was flying through clouds. As if sucked upwards, the cloud mass flew away. I hovered, sometimes in the light, sometimes in the shadow, the capsule turning on itself around a vertical axis. At last the gigantic solar ball appeared in front of the window, rising to the left and disappearing to the right. A distant voice reached me through the noise and crackling: - Attention, Solaris Station! This is Solaris Station. All is well. You are under the control of Solaris Station. The capsule will land at time zero. Repeat, the capsule will land at time zero. Stand by! Stand by, I'm starting. Two hundred and fifty, two hundred and forty-nine, two hundred and forty-eight... Dry mewing interspersed with the words: an automatic device articulated the words of welcome. This was surprising, to say the least. Usually all the men on a space station would hasten to greet the newcomer, especially when he came directly from Earth. I did not have time to be surprised for long, for the orbit of the sun, which had hitherto surrounded me, unexpectedly shifted, and the glowing disc seemed to dance on the planet's horizon, sometimes to the left, sometimes to the right of it. I was

I swayed, like the weight of a giant pendulum, while the planet, a surface streaked with purplish and blackish furrows, rose before me like a wall. My head was beginning to spin when I saw a small chessboard of green and white dots - the Station's orientation signal. With a clatter something snapped off the cone of the capsule; the long collar of the parachute furiously unfurled its rings, and the sound that came to me was irresistibly reminiscent of Earth - for the first time, after so many months, the roar of the wind. Then everything happened very quickly. Until then I knew I was falling. Now I realised it. The green and white chessboard was growing rapidly; I saw that it was painted on an elongated, whale-shaped, silver-sheen body with radar antennae bristling from its sides; I saw that this metallic colossus, pierced by several rows of dark openings, did not rest on the surface of the planet, but hung above it, casting an ellipsoidal shadow of deeper blackness on the inky background. I could see the slatey ripples of the ocean, with a faint movement, and suddenly the clouds rose high, surrounded by a blinding scarlet glow; beyond them the tawny sky became ashen, distant and flat, and all faded away; I was falling into a spin. A brief shock stabilised the capsule; through the window I saw the ocean waves again, like ridges of glittering mercury; the ropes suddenly snapped and the parachute rings, carried by the wind, flew tumultuously over the waves; oscillating at the very particular slow rhythm imparted by an artificial magnetic field, the capsule descended gently. I still had time to catch a glimpse of the grids of the launch pads and, atop their openwork towers, the mirrors of two radio telescopes. There was a clatter of steel bouncing off steel, the capsule came to a halt, a hatch opened and, with a long, hoarse sigh, the metal shell that imprisoned me ended its journey. I heard the lifeless voice of the control facility: - Solaris Station. Zero and zero. The capsule has landed. The end. With both hands (I felt a vague pressure on my chest and the viscera weighed me down unpleasantly) I grabbed the

I grabbed the levers and cut the contacts. A green inscription lit up, "ARRIVAL"; the wall of the capsule opened. The airbed pushed me slightly backwards, so that I had to take a step forward to avoid falling. With a muffled, resigned hiss, the suit expelled air from its pads. I was free. I was under a silver funnel, as high as the nave of a cathedral. Bundles of coloured pipes ran down the sloping walls and disappeared into rounded openings. I turned around. The ventilation shafts roared, sucking in the poisonous gases of the planetary atmosphere, which had seeped in as my vehicle landed inside the Station. Empty, like a shattered cocoon, the cigar-shaped capsule stood, encased by a chalice mounted on a steel base. The outer skin, charred during the journey, had turned a dirty brown. I went down a small ramp. At the bottom, the metal floor had been covered with a rough plastic coating. In places, the wheels of the rocket carts had worn away this plastic mat and the steel was exposed. Suddenly the fan bellows stopped working and there was absolute silence. I looked around, a little indecisive, waiting for someone to appear; but no one seemed to be approaching. Only a neon arrow blazed, indicating a mechanical pavement that unrolled noiselessly. I let myself be carried forward. The ceiling of the room dropped in a beautiful parabolic line to the entrance of a gallery. In the recesses of the gallery were piled up heaps of compressed gas bottles, gauges, parachutes, crates, a quantity of objects thrown in disorder. The mechanical walkway deposited me at the end of the gallery, at the threshold of a rotunda. Even more obvious disorder reigned here. A pool of oily liquid lay beneath a tumble of cans; a foul odour reeked in the air; footprints, slimy stains, wafted in different directions. A tangle of telegraph tapes, torn papers, all sorts of rubbish covered the cans.

A green arrow lit up again, pointing to the central door. Behind the door stretched a narrow corridor, where two men could hardly have walked abreast. Glass paving stones, embedded in the ceiling, lit up this passageway. Another door, painted in a green and white checkerboard pattern, was ajar and I entered. The cabin with its curved walls had a large panoramic window, which was filled with a fiery mist; under the window, the sooty crests of the waves passed silently by. Against the walls were open cupboards filled with instruments, books, dirty glasses, and dusty insulated containers. Five or six small rolling tables and shrivelled armchairs cluttered the stained floor. Only one seat was inflated, with the back properly straightened backwards. In that chair was a small, skinny man with a sunburned face, the skin of his nose and cheekbones peeling off in large patches. I recognised him. It was Snaut, a cybernetics specialist, Gibarian's deputy. In his day he had published some quite original articles in the Solarist Yearbook. I had never had the opportunity to meet him. He was wearing a net shirt, the mesh of which showed here and there the grey hairs of a scrawny chest, and a pair of canvas trousers with multiple pockets, a pair of fitter's trousers, which had once been white and were now stained at the knees and punctured by reagents. He was holding one of those plastic drinking cups used in spacecraft without internal gravity. He stared at me. The pear slipped from his fingers and bounced a few times, spilling a little clear liquid. Slowly the blood had drained from his face. I was too surprised to speak, and the silent scene lasted so long that Snaut insensibly communicated his terror to me. I took a step forward. He curled up in his chair. He shuddered, as if I had struck him. He looked at me with indescribable horror and said in a hoarse voice, "I'm sorry, I'm sorry:

- I don't know you... I don't know you... what do you want? The spilled liquid evaporated quickly; I breathed in a whiff of alcohol. Was he drinking? Was he drunk? But what was he so afraid of? I stood in the middle of the cabin. My legs were limp; my ears felt like they were stuffed with cotton. I felt as if the ground beneath my feet was not real. Behind the curved glass of the window, the ocean was moving steadily. Snaut's bloodshot eyes never left me. The terror was receding from his face; the expression of invincible disgust remained. I asked softly: "What's wrong with you? Are you ill? He answered in a dull voice: "You're worried... Ah, so you're worried? Why do you care about me? I don't know you. I asked: "Where is Gibarian? His breath failed him; in the depths of his eyes, which had become glassy again, a gleam lit up and went out. He stammered, "Gi... Giba... no! no! A stifled laugh, an idiot's laugh, shook him to the core, then he calmed down: - Have you come for Gibarian? For Gibarian? What do you want to do with it? He looked at me as if I had just ceased to be a threat to him; in his words, or rather in his tone, there was hatred and provocation. I stammered out, "What... where is he? - Don't you know? He was drunk, obviously, he had completely lost his mind. I was getting angry. I should have controlled myself and got out, but patience deserted me. I shouted: - Enough! How should I know where he is, since I'm coming now! Snaut! What's going on?

His jaw dropped. Again his breath failed him and a different glow came to his eyes. With both hands he grasped the armrests of the chair; he stood up with difficulty; his knees were shaking. - Where did you come from?" he said, almost sober. I replied angrily: "From Earth! Perhaps you have heard of it? It doesn't look like it! - From the... big sky... so you are... Kelvin? - Yes. What are you looking at me like that for? What's so strange about me? Nothing," he said, wiping his forehead, "nothing... I'm sorry, Kelvin, it's nothing, I assure you, it's just surprise... I didn't expect to see you. - What do you mean you didn't expect to see me? You were notified several months ago, and Moddard telegraphed today from the Prometheus... - Yes, yes, of course, only, you see, these days we're a bit... disorganised. I replied curtly: "Indeed... I can see that! Snaut circled around me, inspecting my suit, a very ordinary suit, with the usual harness of wires and cables across the chest. He coughed, felt his bony nose: "Perhaps you would like to take a bath? It would do you good... the blue door, on the other side. - Thank you, I know the layout of the Station. - Maybe you're hungry? - No! Where is Gibarian? Without answering, he approached the window. With his back turned, he looked distinctly older. His hair was cut short and grey, and deep wrinkles crept into the sunburnt nape of his neck. Behind the window the crests of the huge waves shimmered, creeping up and down in slow motion. Watching

the ocean, one had the impression - a mere illusion, certainly - that the Station was moving imperceptibly, as if sliding off an invisible pedestal; then it seemed to regain its balance, before tilting to the other side in the same lazy movement. Below, thick, blood-coloured foam gathered in the hollow of the waves. For a fraction of a second my throat constricted and I missed the harsh discipline aboard the Prometheus, a memory of a life that suddenly seemed happy and forever gone. Snaut turned round, rubbing his hands nervously: "Listen," he said suddenly, "for the moment there is only me... Today you will have to be content with my company. Call me Old Rat, and don't make a fuss! Since you've seen my photograph, you'll just have to imagine that you've known me for a long time. Everyone calls me Old Rat. I can't help it. Besides, I suppose it's a predestined name, my parents have always had cosmic aspirations... Stubbornly, I repeated my question: - Where is Gibarian? His eyelid fluttered again: - I regret having welcomed you in this way. It's... it's not really my fault. I'd completely forgotten... a lot has happened here, you understand... - It's fine... So, Gibarian? He's not on the Station? Is he on an observation flight? Snaut looked at a pile of coiled cables: - No, he's not out. No, he's not out. And he won't fly away. My ears were still plugged, my hearing was getting worse and I asked, 'What? Where is he? His voice changed and he answered: "You understand very well. He looked coldly into my eyes; I shivered. He was drunk, but he knew what he was talking about. - Yes. - An accident?

He nodded, nodding vigorously and watching for my reaction. - When was it? - This morning, at dawn. I felt an emotion without violence. This exchange of questions and answers had rather calmed me down by its conciseness. I began to explain Snaut's strange behaviour to myself. - What kind of accident? - Go to your cabin and take off that suit... come back here... in... in, say, an hour. I hesitated for a moment. - Well," I said at last. Just as I was heading for the door, he called me back: - Wait! He had a strange look in his eyes and, if he wanted to say something, the words wouldn't pass his lips. After a while he said: "There were three of us, and now, with you, there are three again. Do you know Sartorius? - As I knew you in photography. - He's in the laboratory up there, and I don't think he'll come out before dark, but... you'd know him anyway. If you saw someone else, you understand, someone who wasn't me or Sartorius, you understand, then... - So what? I was dreaming, it was all a dream! Those black waves, with their bloody reflections, under the low sun, and that little man who had just sat back down in his chair, his head hanging again, and who was looking at a pile of cables. - So don't do anything. I said, "Who can I see? A ghost! - Of course you think I'm crazy. No. No, I'm not crazy. I can't tell you anything else at the moment. Besides, maybe... maybe nothing will happen. In any case, don't forget my warning. - Speak more clearly! What is it about?

- Control yourself, prepare to face... anything. I know it's impossible. Try anyway. That's the only advice I can give you. I can't think of anything else. I shouted: - But what could I face? Seeing him sitting there, looking sideways, with his tired, sunburned head, I could hardly contain myself; I wanted to grab him by the shoulders and shake him hard. I wanted to grab him by the shoulders and give him a good shake. He painfully let out his words one by one: - I don't know. In a way, it depends on you. - Hallucinations? - No, it's... it's real. Don't attack. And remember what I told you! I didn't recognise my own voice: - What are you talking about? - We are not on Earth. I shouted again: - A polythereal form? They are not human at all! I was about to throw myself on him, to tear him away from the contemplation which apparently inspired him to make such foolish remarks, when he murmured: "That is why they are formidable. Remember what I told you, be on your guard! - What happened to Gibarian? He did not answer. - What is Sartorius doing? - Come back in an hour. I turned away and went out. As I closed the door, I took one last look at him. He was small, huddled, with his head in his hands and his elbows resting on his stained trousers. Only then did I notice the curdled blood on the back of both his hands.
