The corridor was empty. I stood still for a moment behind the closed door. The moan of the wind enveloped the watertight casing of the hose. On the door panel I saw, stuck askew, carelessly, a square of plaster, covered with a pencil inscription: "Man. I looked at the word, indistinctly scribbled, and wanted to go back to Snaut; I changed my mind. His demented warnings were still ringing in my ears. I moved forward into the passage, my shoulders bent under the weight of the suit. With muffled steps, more or less consciously fleeing from some invisible observer, I returned to the rotunda; coming out of the corridor, I found two doors on my left and two doors on my right. I read the names of the occupants: Dr Gibarian, Dr Snaut, Dr Sartorius. There was no nameplate attached to the fourth door. I hesitated, gently pressed the handle and slowly opened the door. As I pushed the panel open, I had a hunch, almost a certainty, that someone was in the room. I entered. There was no one there. A concave picture window, only slightly smaller than the one in the cabin where I had discovered Snaut, overlooked the ocean, which glowed here - in the sun - with a greasy sheen, the waves seeming to secrete a reddish oil. Scarlet reflections filled the whole room, whose layout was reminiscent of a ship's cabin. On one side, surrounded by book-laden shelves, a mechanical bed had been straightened against the wall; on the other side, between the many cupboards, hung nickel frames - series of aerial views, glued end to end with adhesive strips - and racks of test tubes and retorts, plugged with cotton pads. In front of the window, two rows of white enamel boxes blocked the way. I lifted a few boxes.

I lifted a few lids; the boxes were crammed with instruments of all kinds, interspersed with plastic pipes. In each corner there was a tap, a refrigeration unit, an anti-fogging device. A microscope had been placed on the floor because there was no room on the large table beside the window. Turning round, I saw a tall cupboard by the front door, ajar, containing overalls, gowns, insulating aprons, linen, planetary exploration boots, polished aluminium cylinders - oxygen tanks for portable apparatus. Two of these devices, with their masks, hung from the handle of the vertical bed. Everywhere was the same chaos, a mess that had been hastily and crudely attempted to be hidden. I sniffed the air; I smelled a faint odour of chemical reagents and traces of a more pungent smell - chlorine? Instinctively, I looked for the air vents under the floor; attached to the bars, paper ribbons floated gently; the blowers were working, providing normal air circulation. I took two chairs loaded with books, equipment and tools and placed them at the other end of the room, stacking them as best I could to leave a relatively clear space around the bed between the wardrobe and the bookcases. I pulled out a bracket to hang my suit on; I grabbed the end of the zip and loosened my fingers. Held back by the confused idea that I was stripping myself of a shield, I could not bring myself to abandon my suit. Once again I looked around the room, checked that the door was securely closed, that it had no lock, and after a brief hesitation I dragged some of the heavier boxes towards the threshold. Having thus temporarily barricaded myself, in three shakes I freed myself from my rattling carapace. A narrow mirror, set in a cupboard door, reflected part of the room; from the corner of my eye I caught a moving form; I gasped; but it was only my own reflection. The knitted fabric under the suit was soaked with sweat. I pulled it out and pushed a sliding cabinet; it slid down the wall, revealing the shiny walls of a small bathroom. A flat box and a

A flat, elongated box lay in the shower basin. I carried the tray into the room without difficulty. When I put it back on the floor, a spring blew the lid off and I saw compartments filled with strange objects: dark metal blanks, grotesque replicas of the instruments in the cupboards. None of the instruments in the box were usable; they were dull, atrophied, melted, as if from an inferno. Strangely enough, even the ceramic handles, which were practically non-fusible, had been deformed. No laboratory oven, heated to maximum temperature, could have melted them - perhaps an atomic pile. From the pocket of my suit I pulled out a radiation counter, but the little black beak remained silent as I approached the debris. All I had left on my body were a pair of pants and a net shirt. I quickly removed them, threw them away, and ran into the shower. The shock of the water felt good. Twirling under the hard, hot spray, I rubbed myself with excessive vigour, splashing the walls, expelling, squeezing out of my skin all the filth of cloudy apprehension that had permeated me since my arrival. I searched the cupboard and found a training suit, which could also be worn under the suit. As I shoved all my meagre possessions into a pocket, I felt a hard object stuck among the pages of the notebook; it was a key, the key to my flat back on Earth; I turned the key between my fingers in uncertainty. Finally, I put it on the table. Suddenly it occurred to me that I would need a weapon. A pocketknife was certainly not what I needed, but I didn't have anything else and I wasn't going to start looking for a radioactive gun or anything like that. I sat down on a tubular stool in the middle of the empty space. I wanted to be alone. I was pleased to see that I had more than half an hour; by nature I was scrupulous about keeping my commitments, whether important or insignificant. The hands of the clock - with twenty-four signs dividing the dial - indicated seven hours. The sun - 18 -

was falling. Seven hours here was twenty hours on board the Prometheus. Solaris, on Moddard's screens, was nothing but an indistinct dust, confused with the stars. Well, what did the Prometheus matter to me? I closed my eyes. All I could hear was the whine of the pipes and the faint splash of water in the bathroom. Gibarian was dead. Not long ago, I understood. What had they done with his body? Had they buried him? No, on this planet that was impossible. I pondered the question for a long time, preoccupied exclusively with the fate of the corpse; then I realised the absurdity of my thoughts, I got up and started walking up and down. With the tip of my foot I struck a bag which was emerging from a heap of books; I bent down and picked it up. I bent down and picked it up. It contained a dark glass vial, a vial so light that it seemed to have been blown into paper. I examined it in front of the window, in the crimson glow of a gloomy twilight, full of sooty mists. What was happening to me? Why should I allow myself to be distracted by ramblings, or by the first trinket that came to hand? I shuddered; the lights had come on, controlled by a photocell; the sun had just set. What was going to happen? I was so tense that the feeling of an empty space in my back became unbearable. I decided to fight against myself. I pulled up a chair from the bookcase and chose a volume that had long been familiar to me, the second volume of Hughes and Eugel's old monograph, Historia Solaris. I rested the large, tightly bound book in my lap and began to leaf through it. Solaris was discovered about a hundred years before I was born. The planet orbits two suns - a red sun and a blue sun. No ship had come close to the planet in the forty years since its discovery. At that time, the Gamow-Shapley theory that life was impossible on planets that are satellites of two solar bodies was taken as a certainty. The orbit is constantly

- 19 -

The orbit is constantly modified by the varying play of gravitation, during the revolution around the two suns. The orbit, because of the variations of gravitation, flattens or distends and the elements of life, if they appear, are infallibly destroyed, either by intense heat radiation or by an extreme drop in temperature. These changes take place in a time estimated in millions of years, which is a very short time - according to the laws of astronomy or biology (evolution requires hundreds of millions, if not a billion years). According to the first calculations, Solaris was to approach its red sun by half an astronomical unit in five hundred thousand years, and a million years later to crash into the glowing star. But after a few decades, it was discovered that the orbit did not show any of the expected changes; it was stable, as stable as the orbit of the planets in our solar system. Observations and calculations were repeated with extreme precision, and they simply confirmed the initial conclusions: the orbit of Solaris was unstable. A modest unit among the hundreds of planets discovered each year, to which the major statistics were limited to a few lines defining the particularities of its movement, Solaris gradually rose to the rank of a celestial body worthy of more considerable attention. Four years after this promotion, Ottenskjold's expedition, flying over the planet with the Laakon and two auxiliary ships, set out to study Solaris. This expedition was only a preparatory, even improvised reconnaissance, as the scientists were not equipped to land. Ottenskjold placed a large number of automatic observatory satellites in equatorial and polar orbits, whose main function was to measure gravitational potentials. In addition, the surface of the planet was studied, which is covered by an ocean dotted with countless islands with a high plateau configuration. - The total area of these islands is smaller than the area of Europe, although the diameter of the islands is - 20 - 10 mm.

Solaris is one-fifth the size of the Earth. These irregularly distributed stretches of rocky, desolate territory are mainly clustered in the Southern Hemisphere. - The composition of the oxygen-free atmosphere was also analysed, and very precise measurements of the planet's density, albedo and other astronomical characteristics were made. Predictably, no life was found, either on the islands or in the ocean. Over the next ten years, Solaris became the centre of attraction for all the observatories studying this region of space; the planet, however, showed an astonishing tendency to maintain a gravitational orbit that should have been unstable beyond any doubt. The matter almost became a scandal; the results of the observations could only be inaccurate, and attempts were made to blame (for the sake of science) certain scientists, or the computers they used. The lack of funds delayed the departure of a real solarist expedition for three years. Finally, Shannahan, having completed his team, obtained from the Institute three C-tonnage units, the largest cosmic vessels of the time. A year and a half before the arrival of the expedition, which set out from Aquarian Alpha, a second exploration fleet, acting on behalf of the Institute, had placed an automatic satelloid, Luna 247, into solarist orbit. - This satelloid, after three successive reconstructions, carried out a few decades apart, is still functioning today. - The data provided by the satelloid definitively confirmed the observations of the Ottenskjold expedition concerning the active nature of the ocean's movements. One of Shannahan's ships remained in high orbit; the other two, after preliminary tests, landed on a rocky territory of about six hundred square miles in the southern hemisphere of Solaris. The work of the expedition lasted eighteen months and was carried out under favourable conditions, except for an unfortunate accident caused by the malfunctioning of the apparatus. However, the team of scientists was divided into two camps - 21

The team of scientists, however, was divided into two opposing camps, with the ocean being the object of the quarrel. On the basis of the analyses, it was accepted that the ocean was an organic formation (at that time, no one had yet dared to declare it alive). But while biologists considered it to be a primitive formation - a sort of gigantic whole, a single, monstrous fluid cell (which they called a "prebiological formation"), which surrounded the globe with a colloidal envelope a few miles thick in places - astronomers and physicists claimed that it must be an extraordinarily evolved organised structure; In their view, the ocean may even have exceeded the complexity of terrestrial organic structures, as it was able to effectively influence the course of the planet's orbit. Indeed, no other cause had been discovered that could explain Solaris' behaviour, and planetophysicists had established a relationship between certain processes in the plasma ocean and the locally measured gravitational potential, which changed in accordance with the ocean's 'matter transformations'. So it was physicists, not biologists, who came up with the paradoxical formulation 'plasma machine', meaning a formation that may be lifeless, according to our understanding, but capable of undertaking useful activities - on an astronomical scale, we should hasten to add. On the occasion of this quarrel - the upheavals of which, within a few weeks, reached the most eminent authorities - the Gamow-Shapley doctrine, unquestioned for eighty years, was shaken for the first time. Some still maintained Gamow-Shapley's assertions that the ocean had nothing in common with life, that it was not a "para" or "prebiological" formation, but a geological formation, certainly not very common, and capable only of stabilising the orbit of Solaris, despite the variation in the forces of attraction; to support the argument, they referred to Le Chatelier's law.

- 22 -

In contrast to this conservative attitude, new hypotheses were put forward - including that of Civito-Vitta, one of the most elaborate - proclaiming that the ocean was the result of a dialectical development: from its first form as a pre-ocean, a solution of slowly reacting chemical bodies, and by force of circumstance (the changes of orbit threatening its existence), it had reached the stage of "homeostatic ocean" in a single leap, without passing through all the stages of terrestrial evolution, avoiding the unicellular and multicellular phases, plant and animal evolution, and the constitution of a nervous and cerebral system. In other words, unlike terrestrial organisms, it had not adapted to its environment in a few hundred million years, finally giving rise to the first representatives of a species endowed with reason, but had immediately dominated its environment. This was an original point of view, but it was still not known how this colloidal shell could stabilise the orbit of the celestial body. For almost a century, devices had been known that could artificially create fields of attraction and gravitation - the gravitators; but no one could imagine how this shapeless glue could achieve an effect, which the gravitators caused by complicated nuclear reactions and extraordinarily high temperatures. The newspapers of that time, arousing the curiosity of the average reader and the anger of the scientist, were full of the most improbable fables on the subject of the "Solaris mystery"; one columnist went so far as to claim that the ocean was a distant relative of our electric gymnasts! When, to some extent, the problem was solved, it turned out that the explanation - as was often the case in later solar studies - replaced one enigma with another, perhaps even more surprising one. The observations showed, at least, that the ocean did not act according to the laws of our gravitators (which, moreover, would have been impossible), but succeeded in directly imposing the periodicity of travel; this resulted, among other things, in deviations of the ocean's course from the laws of our gravitators.

in the measurement of time on one and the same meridian of Solaris. Thus, not only did the ocean know, in a certain sense, the Einstein-Boevia theory; it also knew how to exploit its consequences (although we could not say the same). When this hypothesis was put forward, one of the most violent storms of the century was unleashed in the world of science. Venerable, universally accepted theories collapsed: daringly heretical articles invaded the specialist literature; "genius ocean" or "gravitating colloid", the question inflamed the minds. All this was happening several years before I was born. When I was a student - new data having been collected in the meantime - it was already generally accepted that life existed on Solaris, albeit limited to a single inhabitant... The second volume of Hughes and Eugel, which I kept flipping through mechanically, began with an ingenious and amusing systematisation. The classification table contained three definitions: Type - Polythera; Order - Syncytiality; Category - Metamorph. It seemed as if we knew of an infinite number of specimens of the species, when in fact there was only one - weighing, it is true, seven hundred trillion tons. Under my fingers fluttered colourful figures, picturesque graphs, analytical readings and spectral diagrams, showing the type and rate of fundamental transformations and chemical reactions. Quickly, unerringly, the thick volume drew me into the solid ground of mathematical faith. One could conclude that we had acquired a full knowledge of this representative of the Metamorphic category, which lay a few hundred metres below the metallic hull of the Station, veiled at this moment by the shadows of a night that would last four hours. In fact, not everyone was yet convinced that the ocean was indeed a living 'creature', and even less, needless to say, that it was sentient. I put the big book back on the table.

the shelf and picked up the next volume. It was divided into two parts. The first part was devoted to a summary of the innumerable attempts, all of which were aimed at establishing contact with the ocean. At the time of my studies, I remembered perfectly, this establishment of contact was the subject of endless anecdotes, jokes and mockery; compared to the profusion of speculations raised by this problem, medieval scholasticism seemed a model of luminous evidence. The second part, almost one thousand three hundred pages, consisted solely of the bibliography relating to the subject. The texts could not have found a place in the room where I was standing. The first attempts at contact were made by means of specially designed electronic devices, which transformed the stimuli emitted bilaterally. The ocean actively participated in these operations, as it shaped the devices. But all this remained unclear. What exactly was this 'participation'? The ocean was altering some of the components of the submerged instruments, so that the expected rhythm of the discharges was altered and the recording devices reproduced a multitude of signals, fragmentary testimonies of some fantastic activity, which in fact escaped any analysis. Did the data reflect a momentary state of stimulation, or constant pulses, related to the gigantic structures that the ocean was creating somewhere far away from the researchers' location? Had the electronic devices recorded the impenetrable manifestation of the ocean's venerable secrets? Had it delivered its masterpieces to us? How could we know! The stimulus had not provoked two identical reactions. Sometimes the devices almost burst under the violence of the impulses, sometimes there was absolute silence. In short, it was impossible to obtain a repetition of any previously observed manifestation. Constantly, it seemed as if the growing mass of recorded clues was about to be deciphered; had not electronic brains of practically unlimited information capacity been built for this purpose, such that no one could be sure of the results?

no other problem had ever required one before? In fact, results were obtained. The ocean - the source of electrical, magnetic and gravitational impulses - was expressed in a kind of mathematical language; so, by appealing to one of the most abstract branches of analysis, the law of large numbers, it was possible to classify certain frequencies of current discharges; structural homologies appeared, already observed by physicists in the sector of science that takes into consideration the reciprocal relationships of energy and matter, of components and compounds, of the finite and the infinite. This correspondence convinced the scientists that they were in the presence of a monster endowed with reason, of an oceanic protoplasmic brain, enveloping the whole planet and wasting its time in extravagant theoretical considerations on universal reality; our devices, by surprise, had captured the infinitesimal snippets of a formidable monologue, which was eternally unfolding in the depths of this disproportionate brain and which, necessarily, exceeded our understanding. So much for the mathematicians. These hypotheses, according to some, underestimated the possibilities of the human mind; we bowed to the unknown, proclaiming an old doctrine, insolently exhumed, ignoramus et ignorabimus. Others thought that the mathematicians' hypotheses were nothing but sterile and dangerous drivel, because they contributed to the creation of a contemporary mythology, based on the giant brain - electronic or plastic, it doesn't matter - considered as the ultimate objective of existence and sum of life. Others... but there were many scientists and everyone had their own opinion. If one compares the field of 'contact' testing with other branches of solarist studies, where specialisation had developed strongly, especially in the last quarter of a century, one finds that a cybernetic solarist could hardly be heard by a symmetriadological solarist. Veubeke, the director of the Institute when I was a student, once jokingly asked: "How can you communicate with the ocean when you yourself

- 26 -

can no longer understand each other? There was a good deal of truth in the joke. The decision to classify the ocean as a Metamorphic was not an arbitrary one. Its undulating surface could give rise to extremely diverse formations, unlike anything seen on Earth, and the function - adaptation, recognition or otherwise - of these sudden eruptions of plasma 'creativity' remained an enigma. Lifting the heavy volume with both hands, I put it back on the shelf and told myself that our scholarship, all the information accumulated in the libraries, was a useless jumble, a quagmire of evidence and supposition, and that we had not progressed one inch since the beginning of the research seventy-eight years earlier; that the situation was much worse than in the pioneer days, since the assiduous efforts of so many years had led to no indisputable certainty. Our precise body of knowledge was strictly negative. The ocean did not use machines; on certain occasions, however, it seemed capable of constructing them; during the first and second years of exploration it had reproduced the elements of some immersed apparatus; afterwards it simply ignored the experiments which we pursued with Benedictine patience, as if it had lost all interest in our instruments and activities (as if, therefore, it had lost interest in us). It had no nervous system - I continue to chart our 'negative knowledge' - no cells, and its structure was not protean. It did not always react to even the most powerful stimuli (for example, it completely "ignored" the catastrophic accident that occurred during Giese's second expedition; an auxiliary rocket, falling from a height of three hundred thousand metres, crashed on the surface of the planet, the radioactive explosion of its nuclear reserves destroying the plasma in a radius of two thousand five hundred metres).

- 27 -

Gradually, the 'Solaris affair' came to be regarded as a 'lost game' in scholarly circles, particularly among the administrators of the Institute, where voices had recently been raised suggesting that the funds be cut and research suspended. No one had dared to speak of a definitive liquidation of the Station until then; such a decision would have been too obvious a defeat. Moreover, in informal talks, many of our scientists advocated abandoning the 'Solaris affair' in as 'honourable' a manner as possible. Many scientists, however, especially among the young, came to see the 'case' as a touchstone of individual values. All things considered," they said, "the issue is not just about penetrating the solarist civilisation; it is essentially about us, about the limits of human knowledge." For a while the opinion prevailed (spread zealously by the daily press) that the "thinking ocean" of Solaris was a gigantic brain, prodigiously developed, and millions of years ahead of our own civilisation, a kind of "cosmic yogi", a sage, a figure of omniscience, who had long since realised the vanity of all activity and who, for that reason, now retreated into unshakable silence. The opinion was inaccurate, for the living ocean was acting; not, of course, according to human notions; it was not building cities or bridges, it was not constructing flying machines; it was not trying to abolish distances and was not concerned with the conquest of space (the decisive criterion, according to some, of man's undoubted superiority). The ocean was undergoing innumerable transformations, an 'ontological self-metamorphosis' - there is no shortage of scholarly terms in the record of solarist activities! On the other hand, any scientist who studies the multiple solariana experiences the irresistible impression that he perceives fragments of an intelligent, perhaps genial construction, mixed without order with absurd productions, apparently generated by the

delirium. Thus was born, in contrast to the "ocean-yogi" conception, the idea of the "ocean-debilitated". These hypotheses unearthed one of the oldest philosophical problems - the relationship between matter and spirit, mind and consciousness. Du Haart was not lacking in audacity when he was the first to argue that the ocean was endowed with consciousness. The problem, which methodologists were quick to declare metaphysical, gave rise to a great deal of discussion and argument. Was it possible for thought to be deprived of consciousness? Moreover, could the processes observed in the ocean be called thought? Is a mountain a very large rock? Is a planet a huge mountain? One remained free to choose one's terminology, but the new scale of size introduced new standards and new phenomena. The question presented itself as a contemporary transposition of the problem of squaring the circle. Every independent thinker tried to fit his personal contribution into the treasure trove of solar studies. New theories abounded: the ocean was a state of degeneration, of regression, following a phase of "intellectual plenitude"; it was a rambling neoplasm, derived from the bodies of the planet's previous inhabitants, all of which it had devoured, swallowed up, and whose residues it had melted into that eternal, self-replicating form of a supracellular element. In the white light of the fluorescent tubes, a pallid imitation of the brightness of an earthly day, I cleared the table of the devices and books that cluttered it; on the plastic tray I unrolled the map of Solaris and contemplated it, with my arms outstretched and my hands resting on the chrome edge of the table. The living ocean had its shoals and trenches; its islands, covered with a decaying mineral deposit, were surely the nature of the ocean floor - did it order the eruption and subsidence of the rock formations buried in its abyss? No one knew. Looking at the great flat projection of the two hemispheres, variegated with various shades of blue and purple, I felt the poignant astonishment which had seized me long ago.

I had often felt as a child at school when I learned of the existence of Solaris. Lost in the contemplation of this astonishing map, I thought of nothing more than the mystery surrounding Gibarian's death or the uncertainty of my own future. The different sections of the ocean were named after the scientists who had explored them. I was studying the Thexall bulge, which bathed the equatorial archipelagos, when I had the sudden sensation that someone was watching me. I was leaning over the map, but I could no longer see it; an invincible numbness came over all my limbs. Crates and a small cupboard barricaded the door in front of me. It's a robot, I thought - I hadn't found any in the room, and none could have got in without my knowledge. The skin on the back of my neck was beginning to burn; the weight of that heavy, unmoving gaze was becoming unbearable. With my head buried in the hollow of my shoulders, I leaned harder and harder against the table, which began to slide slowly; this movement freed me; I swung around. The room was empty. In front of me there was only the wide, bulging window and the night beyond. But the same sensation persisted. The night was watching me, the amorphous, blind, immense, boundless night. No stars lit up the darkness behind the glass. I drew the opaque curtains. I had not been in the Station for an hour and I was already showing morbid signs. Was this an effect of Gibarian's death? As I knew him, I had judged until then that nothing could ever disturb his mind. I was no longer so sure. I stood in the middle of the room, beside the table. My breathing was calming; I could feel the sweat cooling on my forehead. What had I been thinking about a moment ago? Ah, yes - the robots! I was surprised that I hadn't come across any anywhere. Where had they all gone? The only one I'd been in touch with - by far - was in the vehicle reception area. But the others? I looked at my watch. It was time to join Snaut. I stepped outside. Filaments of light, running under the ceiling, dimly lit the rotunda. I approached the door of

I approached the Gibarian door and stood still for a long time. Silence, silence everywhere. I pressed the handle. In reality, I had no intention of entering. The handle went down, the door opened, revealing a black slot, and then the lights came on. I crossed the threshold quickly and quietly closed the door. Then I turned round. With my shoulders I brushed the door panel. The room was larger than mine; a curtain with small pink and blue flowers, probably brought from Earth with the personal effects and not foreseen in the Station equipment, veiled three quarters of the panoramic window. Along the walls were shelves, separated by cupboards, both glazed in pale green enamel with silver highlights. The bookcases and cupboards had been emptied of their contents, which lay in heaps between the stools and armchairs. At my feet, blocking the passage, two rolling tables were overturned, buried under a heap of periodicals escaping from crammed briefcases, which had burst. Books, with their leaves spread out in a fan shape, were stained with multicoloured liquids, which had been spilled by corroded retorts and flasks, glass containers so thick that a simple fall, even from a considerable height, could not have shattered them. Under the window lay a desk, crushing with its mass a work lamp with a movable arm. Two legs of an overturned stool sank into the half-open drawers. A veritable tide of papers of all sizes, covered with handwritten characters, flooded the floor. I recognised Gibarian's handwriting and bent down. As I lifted the loose sheets I noticed that my hand was casting a double shadow. I straightened up. The pink curtain flamed, with a bluish-white glowing line running through it, and widening. I lifted the curtain - an unbearable blaze was advancing over the horizon, chasing an army of spectral shadows, rising from the waves and stretching towards the Station. It was dawn. After the interlude of an hour of night, the second sun of the planet, the blue sun, was rising in the sky. When I returned to my pile of papers, the automatic switch turned off the lights. I came across the description

I came across a precise description of an experiment, decided upon three weeks before; Gibarian intended to expose the plasma to an extremely intense X-ray radiation. From the text I understood that it was intended for Sartorius, who was to organise the operations; I was holding a copy of the project in my hand. The whiteness of the sheets hurt my eyes. This new day was different from the previous one. In the warm orange sunlight, russet mists hovered over the bloody black ocean, almost constantly veiling the waves, the clouds, the sky with a crimson screen. Now the blue sun shone through the flower-printed fabric with a quartz light. My tanned hands looked grey. The room had changed; all the red-hued objects had faded, turned grey-brown, while the white, green and yellow objects had become brighter and seemed to emit their own light. Blinking, I took another look through the slit in the curtain. An expanse of flowing metal vibrated and pulsed under a sky of white flames. I lowered my eyelids and stepped back. On the shelf of the washbasin (the edge of which was chipped) I found a pair of large black glasses; they covered half my face. The curtain now radiated a sodium light. I continued reading, picking up the sheets and arranging them on the only table that was still usable. There were gaps in the text; I searched the scattered pages in vain. Getting hold of the reports of experiments already undertaken, I learned that for four consecutive days Gibarian and Sartorius had subjected the ocean to radiation at a point fourteen hundred miles from the present position of the Station. The use of X-rays was forbidden by a UN convention because of their harmful effect, and I was sure that no one had sent a request to Earth for permission to carry out such experiments. I looked up and saw my image in the mirror of a half-open cupboard door, a pale face masked by dark glasses. The room, with its white and blue reflections, looked strange too. But soon I heard a prolonged creak and the shutters outside, sealed,

slid past the window. There was a moment of darkness, then the lamps came on, which seemed strangely dim. It was getting hotter and hotter; the steady output of the air-conditioning units sounded like an exasperated yelp. The Station's refrigeration units were working at full capacity. However, the oppressive heat kept rising. I heard footsteps. Someone was walking in the rotunda. In two silent jumps I was near the door. The footsteps slowed down; the stranger was behind the door. The handle came down; without thinking, mechanically, I grasped it; the pressure did not increase, it did not weaken. No one on either side of the door raised their voice. Each of us held the handle and stayed like that for a while. Suddenly the handle rose up, slipping from my hands. The muffled footsteps went away. I listened again, my ear to the panel, but I heard nothing more.
