Hastily pocketing Gibarian's notes, I approached the wardrobe: suits and other clothes had been pushed aside, squeezed to one side, as if a man had taken refuge in the back of the wardrobe. From the avalanche of papers on the floor emerged the corner of an envelope. I picked it up. It was addressed to me. With a dry throat I tore the envelope open; I had to make an effort to unfold the sheet of paper it contained. In his regular handwriting, perfectly legible, though very thin, Gibarian had drawn two lines: Supplement Ann. Solar. Vol 1 : Vot. Separat. Messenger ds aff. F.; Ravintzer: Petit Apocryphe. That was all, not a word more. Did these two lines contain any important information? When had he written them? I told myself that I had to consult the library's files as soon as possible. I knew the supplement to the first volume of the Yearbook of Solarist Studies, that is to say, without having read it, I knew of its existence - did it not have the value of a purely historical document? As for Ravintzer and his Petit Apocryphe, I had never heard of it. What was to be done? I was already almost fifteen minutes late. Once again, with my back to the door, I searched the room with a careful eye. Only then did I notice the bed, standing upright against the wall and concealed by a large map of Solaris. Something hung behind the map - a pocket tape recorder. The reel had been recorded nine-tenths of the way through. I removed the device from its case and hung it up.

I took the device out of its case, hung it up in the same place I had found it, and slipped the tape recorder into my pocket. I walked back to the door, my eyes closed and I watched for any outside noise. Nothing. I opened the door to a black abyss and at last had the wit to remove my glasses; the filaments of light under the ceiling lit up the rotunda sparingly. Spread out between the four doors of the living quarters and the shaft leading to the radio booth, a multitude of corridors went off in a star shape in all directions. Suddenly, emerging from a recess that led to the communal shower room, a tall figure appeared, barely distinguishable, confused with the gloom. I froze, riveted to the floor. A giant, negroid woman waddled quietly forward. I caught a glimpse of the whites of her eyes and heard the soft click of her bare feet. She was dressed only in a yellow, woven straw skirt; her huge breasts swayed freely and her black arms were as big as thighs. She passed me - there was barely a metre between us - without giving me a glance. Her straw skirt swaying in rhythm, she went on her way, like those steatopygic statues of the Stone Age, which one can see in anthropology museums. She opened Gibarian's door. Her figure stood out clearly on the threshold, surrounded by the brighter light that had come on inside the room. Then she closed the door. I was alone. With my right hand I took hold of my left hand and squeezed it with all my strength, until the joints cracked. I stared blankly at the large empty room. What had happened? What was it? Suddenly I faltered; I remembered Snaut's warnings. What did it mean? Who was this monstrous Aphrodite? I took a step, a single step, in the direction of Gibarian's cabin. I knew I wouldn't get in. With my nostrils wide open, I sucked in the air. Why? I had instinctively waited for the characteristic smell of his sweat, but I had not smelled anything, not even when we were only one step apart.


I don't know how long I remained leaning against the cool metal wall, hearing nothing but the distant, monotonous sound of the air conditioners. I slapped both my cheeks lightly and made my way to the radio booth. As I pressed the handle, I heard a harsh voice. - Who's there? - It's me, Kelvin. Snaut was sitting at a table between a pile of aluminium boxes and the transmitter, eating meat concentrate straight from the can. Did he ever leave the radio booth? I looked at him and saw that he was playing with his jaws, and then I realised that I was starving myself. I walked over to the cupboards, chose the least dusty plate and sat down opposite Snaut. We ate in silence. Snaut stood up, uncorked a heatproof bottle and filled two cups with hot broth. Putting the bottle back on the floor - there was no room on the table - he asked me: "Have you seen Sartorius? - No... where is he? - Upstairs. Upstairs was the laboratory. We continued to eat, without saying anything more. Snaut dutifully scraped the bottom of his box. Four globes, fixed to the ceiling, illuminated the room; a hermetic shutter closed the window outside. The reflections of the luminous globes vibrated on the plastic cover of the transmitter. Snaut was now wearing a flowing black jumper, which was fraying at the wrists. Red veins marred the taut skin of his cheekbones. He asked me: "What's the matter? - Nothing... why? - You're all sweaty. I wiped my forehead. It was true, I was dripping; the reaction, surely, after an unexpected encounter. Snaut was looking at me

Snaut looked at me with an inquisitive eye. Should I tell him? What incomprehensible game was being played here, and who was the opponent of whom? - It is hot. I thought the air conditioning in your house worked better than this! - The devices are automatically adjusted every hour. - His gaze became insistent: Are you sure it's just the heat? I didn't answer. Snaut threw the utensils and empty boxes into the sink. He returned to his chair and continued to question me: "What are your intentions? I replied phlegmatically: "That depends on you. I suppose you have a research plan, right? A new stimulus, probably X-rays, or something like that... He frowned: - X-rays... who told you about that? - I don't remember. Someone mentioned it to me. Maybe on the Prometheus. So, have you started? - I don't know the details. It was Gibarian's idea. He set it up with Sartorius. I wonder how you know. I shrugged: "You don't know the details? I didn't finish my sentence; Snaut was silent. The yapping of the air conditioners had stopped. The temperature remained at a bearable level. A nasal sound lingered in the air, like the buzzing of a dying fly. Snaut got up from his chair and leaned over the control panel of the transmitter; he began to manipulate the levers, without order and without result, because he had left the ignition switch in the dead position. He amused himself for a moment; then he noticed: - I could only see his back, and I said, 'Yes?

He turned round and looked at me with an evil expression. I had not sought to enrage him, but, unaware of the game that was being played, I kept a guarded expectation. You went to Gibarian's," he said suddenly, "and that wasn't a question. I looked at him peacefully. You went to his house," he repeated. I nodded, "If you insist..." He asked, "There was a man there. He asked: "Was anyone there? So he had seen her - at least he knew she existed! - No one... who could I find there? - Then why didn't you let me in? I smiled: - Because I was afraid. I remembered your warnings. When the handle moved, I held it mechanically. Why didn't you tell me it was you? I would have let you in. I thought it was Sartorius. - And what did you think? To my question, he replied again with another question: - What do you think... what happened there? I hesitated: - You must know better than I do... where is he? - In the cold room. We took it away this morning. - Where did you find it? - In the cupboard. - In the cupboard? Was he already dead? - The heart was still beating, but he wasn't breathing. It was the end.

- Did you try to revive him? - No. - Why? He stammered: - I didn't have time. When I laid him down, he was dead. - Was he standing in the wardrobe? In the middle of those suits? - Yes, he was. Snaut took a sheet of paper from the corner desk and handed it to me: 'I've drawn up a provisional report... After all, I'm not unhappy that you saw the room. Cause of death, injection of pernostal, lethal dose. It's written there... I looked at the sheet of paper and muttered: - Suicide... what reason? - Nervous disorder, depression, call it what you will... you know better than me. I remained seated; Snaut stood before me. Intercepting his gaze, I replied: - I only know what I have seen myself. He asked quietly: "What do you mean? - He stole the pernostal and hid in the cupboard, yes? In that case, it's not a nervous disorder or an attack of depression, but a very serious condition, a paranoid psychosis... - Speaking more and more slowly and not taking my eyes off him, I added: He certainly had the impression of seeing something. Snaut started to play with the transmitter's controls again. After a moment's silence I said, "Here is your signature - and Sartorius'? - He is in the laboratory. I've already told you. He doesn't show up. I suppose he... - What? - That he's locked himself in. - Locked himself in? Ah, he's locked himself in... Maybe he's barricaded himself in? - It's possible.

- Snaut... there's someone in the Station, someone else. He had let go of the controls and was looking at me, his torso tilted to one side: - You saw! - You warned me. Against whom? Against what? A hallucination? - What did you see? - A human being? He was silent. He had turned against the wall, as if to hide his face from me. His fingertips were tapping the metal plating. I examined his hands. There was no more blood in his knuckles. I had a brief glare. In a low voice, almost a whisper, as if I had confided a secret to him that no one should hear, I said: "This is not a mirage, but a real being, who can be touched, who can be hurt, and whom you saw just today. - How do you know that? Glued to the wall, he hadn't moved; my words were hitting him in the back. - Before I arrived... very shortly before I arrived, wasn't it? He tensed; I saw the panic in his eyes. - And you! - He choked. - And you, who are you? I thought he was going to rush at me. I had not expected such a reaction. The situation was becoming absurd. He didn't believe I was who I said I was! What did this mean? He looked at me with increasing terror. Was he delirious? Had the mephitic fumes of the outside atmosphere intoxicated him? Anything was possible. Yes, and I, I had seen her, that creature, so had I? I asked, "Who is it? These words calmed him down. For a moment he looked at me with an investigative eye, as if he still doubted me.


He sat down limply in his chair and took his head in his hands; even before he had opened his mouth, I knew that he was not resolved to answer me directly. - The fever," he said softly. I asked again: - Who is it? He growled: - If you don't know... - Then what? - So what? - Nothing. - Snaut... We are isolated, far from everything. Let's put our cards on the table! Things are confusing enough. - What do you want me to do? - I want you to tell me who you saw. - And you?" he threw out his hand suspiciously. - Well, I'll answer you and then you can answer me. Don't worry, I won't think you're mad... - Mad? Mad?" "Good heavens! - He tried to smile. - But you've understood nothing, absolutely nothing... If for a moment he could have thought he was delirious, he wouldn't have done that, he'd be alive. - So your report, this story of nervous disorders, is a lie? - Of course it is! - Why not write the truth? He repeated: "Why? A long silence followed. No, I really didn't understand anything. I thought I had convinced him of my sincerity, I had imagined that we would work together to solve the enigma. Why, why did he refuse to talk? - Where are the robots? - In the warehouses. We locked them all up. We left only the reception staff in place. - Why? Again he refused to answer. - Don't you want to talk? - I can't talk.

Constantly he seemed on the verge of giving in, then he shrank back. Maybe I should go up to Sartorius' house. I remembered the letter, and in that moment I attributed great importance to it: "Are you planning to continue the experiments? He shook his shoulders dismissively: "What's the use? - Ah... then what are we going to do? He was silent. A faint sound of footsteps could be heard in the distance, bare feet hitting the ground. Amongst the nickel-plated and plastic-coated instruments, amongst the high coffers criss-crossed with glass tubes and containing the complicated apparatus of the electronic installations, the muffled echo of this shuffling echoed in a grotesque and unreal way. Unable to control myself, I stood up; I listened to the approaching footsteps and watched Snaut. With his eyelids half lowered, he did not look frightened. So he was not afraid of her? I asked: - Where did it come from? - And when he was slow to answer: "Won't you tell me? - I don't know. - I don't know. The sound of footsteps faded away and died. - You don't believe me? I swear I don't know. Silently, I opened the wardrobe that held the suits and pushed aside the heavy tracksuits. At the back, as I had expected, hung the gas guns we used to move in the void. I picked up a gun, checked that it was loaded and slung the strap of the scabbard over my shoulder. It wasn't much of a weapon, but it was better than nothing. As I adjusted the length of the strap, Snaut smiled mockingly, showing his yellow teeth: - Good hunting! I moved towards the door: - Thank you. He tore himself away from his chair: - Kelvin!

I looked at him. He was no longer smiling. I had never seen such a weary face. I waited; he moved his lips, but made no sound. I turned around and walked out.
