My face and hands were burnt. I remembered that when I was looking for a sleeping pill for Harey (I was in no mood to laugh at my own candor), I had noticed a jar of burn ointment. So I went home. I opened the door; the red twilight lit up the room. Someone was sitting in the armchair, beside which Harey had knelt. Terror paralysed me, a panic terror that urged me to flee; it lasted only a fraction of a second. The seated form raised its head. It was Snaut. Cross-legged (he was still wearing the same reagent-stained canvas trousers), he was consulting papers; a whole sheaf of sheets lay beside him on a small table. He lowered the papers in his hand, pushed his glasses to the end of his nose and scowled at me. Without a word, I walked over to the sink, took the jar of ointment from the medicine chest, and began to rub the fluid ointment on my forehead and cheeks. Fortunately, I was not too swollen and the eyes, since I had had the reflex of squeezing my eyelids, did not seem inflamed. At the temple and cheekbones I pricked a few large blisters with a sterilised injection needle; the aseptic pad collected a serous fluid. Then I applied two pieces of wet gauze to my face. Snaut watched me the whole time. I ignored his gaze. When I had finally finished (and I was still suffering from the burns), I sat down in the second chair. Before that I had to take off Harey's dress, a very ordinary dress, but without the clasps! Snaut, with his hands clasped around a pointed knee, continued to observe me critically. - Shall we have a little chat?

I didn't answer; I was busy putting back a piece of gauze, which was sliding down my cheek. - You had a visitor, didn't you? I answered curtly: - Yes. He had started the conversation in a tone that I didn't like. - And you got rid of him? Well, that's called being expeditious. He touched his forehead, whose skin was still peeling, revealing pink surfaces of new epidermis. I was amazed. Why hadn't Snaut's and Sartorius's 'sunburns' guided my thinking so far? Sunburns... but no one was sunbathing here! Without noticing the sudden glare in my eyes, he continued: "I suppose you didn't do anything right away? What did you try, narcosis, poison, free fight? - Do you want to have a serious discussion about our business, or do you want to be a clown? If you want to fool around, you can leave me alone! He drew his eyelids together: - Often, one plays the clown in spite of oneself... Didn't you try the rope or the hammer? And the inkwell, like Luther? No ? Well," he grinned, "he's a great guy! One, two, I'll get you in the rocket, off you go, and that's it! - He consulted his watch. - So we have two or three hours. - With an unpleasant smile he added: Am I being obnoxious? I nodded vigorously: "Disgusting! - And if I told you a little story, would you believe me? Would you believe a single word of my story? I was silent. He continued, with his ugly smile:


- It happened first to Gibarian. Locked in his cabin, he only spoke to us through the door. And you wonder what we thought? I remained silent. - Of course, we thought he had gone mad. Through the door he let out something - not everything. You may wonder why he didn't tell us that there was someone in his house? Oh, suum cuique! But he was a real scholar. He begged us to give him a chance. - What chance? - He was probably trying to solve the problem, to get to the bottom of it, to classify it. He worked at night. Do you know what he was doing? You must know! - Those calculations in the drawer of the radio booth... is that him? - Yes. How long did it last? - The visit? A week or so... We thought he was hallucinating, having motor problems. I gave him scopolamine. - What do you mean, to him? - Yes. He took it, but not for himself. He tried it on someone else. There you are. - And what about you? - What about us? On the third day, we decided to go in, to break down the door, if there was no other way, to upset his dignity and cure him. - Ah... - Yes. - And then, in that cupboard... - Yes, my boy, yes. But in the meantime we had also had visitors. We couldn't take care of him anymore, we couldn't tell him what was going on. Now it's... it's become a routine. He had spoken so low that I guessed the last words rather than hearing them. I cried out, 'I don't understand! If you were listening at his door, you must have heard two voices...

- No, we only heard his voice. There were strange noises... we thought it was him too. - Only his voice! How come you didn't hear... the other one? - I don't know. I have a theory about it... I'll let it rest, especially as there's no point in getting fixated on details. But you, did you see something yesterday, otherwise you would have thought we were crazy? - I thought I was the one who had gone mad. - Oh, and you didn't see anyone? - I saw someone. - Who did you see? I looked at him for a long time, his face was no longer smiling, and I said, "That... that black woman. - He was leaning forward; his body relaxed imperceptibly. - You could have warned me... - I warned you! - I warned you! In what way! - In the only way possible. I didn't know who you would see! No one could have known, no one ever knows... - Listen, Snaut, I'd like to ask you... You... you've known the question for some time. Is she... the person who came to visit me today... - Are you wondering if she will come back? I nodded; he answered: - Yes and no. - What does that mean? - She... this person will come back, unaware of everything, just as she was at the beginning of her first visit. More exactly, she will seem to be unaware of what you have done to get rid of her. If you respect the conditions, she won't be aggressive. - What conditions? - That depends on the circumstances. - Snaut! - Let's not waste time hiding. - Let's not waste time on secrets!

- Stuff? Kelvin, I don't think you've understood yet... - His eye twinkled. - Well, can you tell me who came to your house? I swallowed my saliva. I lowered my head. I didn't want to look at him. I would have preferred to deal with someone else, not him. But I had no choice. A piece of gauze came off and fell on my hand and I shuddered. - A woman who..." I stopped. - She killed herself. An injection... - Suicide? - Yes. - Is that all? He waited; as I was silent, he murmured: "No, that's not all..." I looked up quickly; he wasn't looking at me. - How do you know? - He said nothing. - Indeed, that's not all. - I moistened my lips. - We had an argument. Or rather no. It was me, I got angry, you know the kind of thing you say at times like that. I grabbed my clothes and took off. She had hinted to me... she hadn't said it in so many words, when you've lived with someone for years it's not necessary... I was sure she was talking off the cuff - that she wouldn't dare, that she'd be afraid, and I told her that too. The next day I remembered that I had left those... those bulbs in the drawer. She knew about them - I had brought them from the laboratory, I needed them - I had explained to her that in high doses they were very strong... I was afraid, I wanted to go back and get the ampoules, but then I told myself that it would look like I was taking her words seriously. On the third day I made up my mind, I was worried. When I arrived, she was dead. - Ah, poor innocent! I was startled. But Snaut was not laughing at me. It seemed to me that I was seeing him for the first time. His face was grey; the deep wrinkles in his cheeks expressed unspeakable exhaustion; he looked like a man who was seriously ill. Strangely intimidated, I asked:

- Why did you say that? - Because your story is tragic. - Seeing my agitation, he added hastily: No, no, you still don't understand. Indeed, it's a terrible burden to carry, and you probably consider yourself a murderer, but... there are worse things. - Ah, really! - Yes, really, and I'm even glad that you refuse to believe me. Some of the things that have happened are horrible. But the most horrible thing is... what didn't happen, what never existed. I said, in a weak voice: - What? He shook his head: - A normal man..., he said. What is a normal man? One who has never committed anything heinous? Well, but has he ever had uncontrolled thoughts? Something, a fantasy, arose somewhere inside him, ten or thirty years ago, something he fought against and forgot about, and which he did not fear, because he knew that he would never let it blossom and that it would never lead to any action. And now imagine that, suddenly, in broad daylight, he meets this... this thought, embodied, riveted to him, indestructible! He wonders where it is - do you know where it is? - Here," Snaut whispered, "in the Solaris Station. I hesitated: - What is this about? He interrupted me impatiently: "And you, Kelvin, you are a psychologist! Who hasn't had a certain daydream, a certain madness? Think of a maniac who falls in love with a piece of dirty laundry, who, by dint of prayers and threats, and in defiance of danger, acquires that wretched rag! Funny story, isn't it? A man who, at the same time, is ashamed of the object of his lust and cherishes it more than anything else, a man ready to sacrifice his life for this love,

for he may have feelings as strong as those of Romeo for Juliet... Such cases exist, don't they? You understand, therefore, that there must be things... situations which no one has dared to materialise and which thought has generated by accident, in a moment of madness, insanity, call it what you will. In the next stage, the idea becomes matter. That's it. Stunned, my throat dry, I repeated: - Voilà? - My head was bursting. - And the Station? What does the Station have to do with it? - It's as if you're pretending not to understand," he growled, looking at me with his eyes, "I keep talking about Solaris, only Solaris and nothing else. If you are brutally disappointed by reality, it's not my fault. Besides, after what you've already been through, you can listen to me all the way! We fly off into the cosmos, prepared for everything, i.e. loneliness, struggle, fatigue and death. Modesty prevents us from proclaiming it, but at times we consider ourselves admirable. However, all things considered, our eagerness turns out to be a sham. We do not want to conquer the cosmos, we only want to extend the Earth to the borders of the cosmos. One planet will be as arid as the Sahara, another as icy as our polar regions, another as lush as the Amazon. We are humanitarian and chivalrous, we do not want to enslave other races, we simply want to pass on our values and in exchange take over their heritage. We consider ourselves to be the knights of the Holy Contact. This is a second lie. We are only looking for man. We do not need other worlds. We need mirrors. We do not know what to do with other worlds. One world, our world, is enough for us, but we do not accept it as it is. We are looking for an ideal image of our own world; we are looking for a planet, a civilisation superior to our own, but developed on the basis of the prototype of our primitive past. On the other hand, there is something in us that we refuse, that we defend ourselves against, and yet that remains, because we do not leave the Earth in the state of

It is not just a statue of the Hero Man that flies away! We stand here as we really are, and when the page turns and reveals this reality - that part of our reality we prefer to keep silent - we are no longer in agreement! I had listened patiently: - But what are you talking about? - What we wanted: contact with another civilisation. Contact has been made! And we can look at our monstrous ugliness, our madness, our shame under a microscope! His voice trembled with rage. - So you think it's the ocean? That the ocean is causing... this? But why? I'm not asking how yet, I'm asking why! Do you seriously believe that it wants to play with us? Or to punish us - primary demonomania! The planet dominated by a huge devil, who satisfies the demands of his satanic humour by sending succubi to the members of a scientific expedition... Snaut, you don't believe such nonsense! He muttered through his teeth: - The devil is not so stupid... I looked at him in bewilderment. Perhaps the events - assuming that we had experienced them with a sane and lucid mind - had finally shaken his nerves? Reaction psychosis? He laughed silently: - Are you making your diagnosis? Don't be too hasty! You've only been through one ordeal, and in fairly benign conditions. - Ah, the devil had mercy on me! I was getting tired of the conversation. - What exactly do you want? You want me to tell you what plans this mass of metamorphic plasma - X trillion tons of metamorphic plasma - has for us? No plans, perhaps. - What do you mean, no plans? Snaut smiled:

- You should know that science only deals with phenomena, not causes. The phenomena? They started to manifest themselves eight or nine days after this experiment with X-rays. Perhaps the ocean reacted to the irradiation with some other irradiation, perhaps it probed our brains and reached some psychic cysts. My interest was aroused: - Cysts? - Yes, psychic processes isolated from the rest, locked up, stifled, encysted - foci smouldering under the ash of memory! He deciphered them and used them, as one uses a recipe or a construction plan... You know how similar are the asymmetrical crystalline structures of the chromosome and the asymmetrical crystalline structures of the deoxy-ribo-nucleic acid molecule entering into the composition of the cerebrosides, which constitute the substratum of the processes of the memory... This genetic matter is a plasma "which remembers". So the ocean has read us, recorded the smallest details, and then... you know the rest. But for what reason? Well, not to destroy us. It could have destroyed us much more easily. Apparently - given his technological means - he could have done anything, put your look-alike against me, put mine against you, for example. I shouted: "Oh, that's why you were afraid the first night I arrived! - Yes, I was. Besides," he added, "who says he didn't do it? How do you know I'm really the good old Rat who came here two years ago... He started laughing silently again, enjoying my embarrassment, and then he growled: - No, no, that's enough! We are both happy mortals... I could kill you, you could kill me... - And the others, can't we kill them? - I wouldn't advise you to try - horrible sight! - Nothing can kill them?

- I don't know. In any case, no poison, no knife, no injection... - The radioactive gun? - Would you risk it? - As long as we know they're not human... In a way, subjectively, they are human. They have absolutely no idea where they come from. Surely you've noticed that? - Yes, I have. So... how does it work? - They... everything is regenerated with an inconceivable speed, at an impossible speed - at sight. And they start behaving like ... - How? - How do you mean? - As we remember them, as they are engraved in our memories, according to which... Without worrying about the ointment that ran down my cheeks and dripped on my hands, I asked abruptly: - Did Gibarian know? - You mean... knew as much as we did? - Yes. - Very probably. - Did he tell you anything? - No, he didn't. I found a book at his place... I jumped up. - The Little Apocrypha! - I jumped to my feet. - He looked at me suspiciously and added: Who could have told you about it? No, don't worry, you can see that my skin is burnt and that it is not regenerating! Gibarian had left a letter for me in his cabin. - A letter? What does it say? - Not much. A note rather than a letter, bibliographical references - allusions to the yearbook supplement and the Apocrypha. What is this Apocrypha? - An antique, which seems to me to have something to do with our situation... here! - He pulled a leather-bound booklet from his pocket and handed it to me.

I grabbed the little book with its worn corners: - And Sartorius? - What about Sartorius? Everyone does what they can. Sartorius, on the other hand, is trying to remain normal - that is to say, to preserve his respectability as an envoy on an official mission. - You've got to be kidding! - No, I'm not laughing. I was once with him, I'll skip the details, but in short, there were eight of us and we only had five hundred kilos of oxygen left. One after the other, we abandoned our occupations, and finally we were a team of bearded men. He alone shaved, brushed his shoes. That's how he is. Now, of course, he can only pretend, act, or commit a crime. - A crime? - You're right, the word doesn't quite fit, "divorce by ejection"! Does that sound better? - Very funny. - If you don't like it, suggest something else! - Ah, leave me alone! - No, let's talk seriously! You know about as much as I do now. Do you have a plan? - No plan. I haven't the slightest idea of what I'll do when... when she comes back. If I understand correctly, she'll come back? - It's to be expected. - Which way do they come in? The Station's envelope is airtight. Maybe the shielding... He shook his head: - The shielding is in perfect condition. I don't know where they're coming from. Usually you're expected to wake up, and you have to sleep sometime! - Could we barricade ourselves solidly inside the cabins? - Barricades don't last long. There's only one way out - you can guess which. He stood up; I stood up too. - Come on, Snaut!... You suggest liquidating the Station and you expect me to take the initiative on my own?

- It's not that simple. Of course, we can escape, even if only to the Satelloid, and send an S.O.S. from there. They'll call us mad, of course, and keep us in a nursing home on Earth until we politely retract our statement - distant planet, isolation, collective insanity, they won't think we're unusual. After all, even in a nursing home we would be better off than here: a garden, peace and quiet, small white rooms, nurses, accompanied walks... Hands in pockets, staring at a corner of the room, he spoke with the utmost seriousness. The red sun had disappeared over the horizon and the ocean was a dark desert, moiré with dying lights, the last stray reflections among the long manes of the waves. The sky was blazing. Clouds with purplish fringes crossed this red and black world, unspeakably gloomy. - So, do you want to run away or not? Not yet? He smiled: - Steadfast fighter... if you fully realised the question you were raising, you wouldn't insist so much. It's not about what I want, it's about what's possible. - What is possible? - That's just it, I don't know. - So we stay here? You think we'll find a way... Skinny, suffering, with his face peeled off and furrowed with wrinkles, he faced me: - Maybe it's worth staying. He turned, picked up his papers and left. I opened my mouth to hold him back, but not a sound passed my lips. I had only to wait. I approached the window, and my eye wandered absent-mindedly over the crimson shimmer of the dark ocean. I had the idea of locking myself in one of the rockets of the space station, a stupid idea which I did not pursue: sooner or later I would have to get out of the rocket!

I sat down next to the window; I began to leaf through the book Snaut had given me. The fires of twilight lit up the room and coloured the pages of the booklet. It was - compiled by a certain Othon Ravintzer, a graduate in philosophy - a collection of articles and works of a value that, in general, could not be mistaken. Every science gives rise to some pseudo-science, inspires a digressive approach in bizarre minds; astronomy finds its caricaturists in astrology; chemistry, in the past, found them in alchemy. It was therefore not surprising that solaristics, in its early days, provoked an explosion of marginal cogitations. Ravintzer's book gave asylum to precisely this kind of intellectual speculation, preceded - I must honestly add - by an introduction in which the author distanced himself from the texts reproduced. He considered, not without reason, that such a collection could offer a precious document of the period, both for the historian and for the psychologist of science. Berton's report - divided into two parts and supplemented by a logbook statement - occupied an honourable place in the booklet. From two o'clock to 4.40 p.m., the local time agreed by the expedition, the logbook entries were terse and negative. Altitude 1,000 - or 1,200 - or 800 metres - nothing in sight - deserted ocean. The same words were repeated several times. Then, at 4.40 pm: a red fog rises. Visibility 700 metres. Deserted ocean. 5 p.m.: fog thickens - silence - visibility 400 metres, with breaks. I descend to 200. 17:20: I am in fog. Altitude 200. Visibility 20-40 metres. I climb back up to 400. 5:45 p.m.: altitude 500. Sea of fog up to the horizon. In the fog, funnel-shaped openings through which I see the surface of the ocean. I try to enter one of these funnels, where something stirs.

17:52: I see some kind of eddy - it's spewing yellow foam. A wall of fog surrounds me. Altitude 100. I descend to 20. This was the end of Berton's logbook. This was followed by the story of his illness, or, more accurately, the deposition dictated by Berton and interrupted by questions from the members of the commission. "Berton: When I descended to thirty metres, it became very difficult to keep the altitude; violent winds were blowing in that shaft. I had to hold on to the controls and for a while - ten or fifteen minutes - I did not look outside. I realised too late that a powerful vortex was blowing me into the fog. This was no ordinary fog, it was a thick, colloidal material that covered all my windows. I had a hard time cleaning them. This fog - this glue - was tenacious. In addition, because of the resistance of the fog to the propeller, the speed of rotation was reduced by about thirty per cent and I began to lose altitude. As I was very low down and was afraid of crashing into the waves, I let go of the throttle completely. The aircraft kept its altitude, but it didn't come back up. I still had four cartridges of rocket boosters left. I didn't use them, I told myself that the situation was not yet desperate. I thought that a layer of this glue had adhered to the propeller, but the surplus charge meter was still showing zero, I couldn't understand it. Since I had entered the fog, I could not see the sun - only a red glow. I kept on moving, hoping that I would eventually come to one of these shafts, and after half an hour I did. I found myself in another crevasse, an almost perfect cylinder, a few hundred metres in diameter. The wall of the cylinder was a gigantic vortex of fog, spiralling upwards. I tried to stay in the middle of the "well", where the wind was less violent. Then I noticed a change in the surface of the ocean. The waves had almost completely disappeared and the upper layer of the fluid was
The waves had almost completely disappeared and the upper layer of the fluid - what makes up the ocean - was becoming transparent, with cloudy streaks here and there dissipating, and in a short time everything became clearer. I could see clearly to a depth of several metres. I could see a kind of mud, yellow silt, which projected vertical filaments. When these filaments emerged to the surface they had a glassy sheen, then they began to foam - they foamed - and then this foam congealed; it looked like a very thick burnt sugar syrup. These slimy filaments would tangle and knot, and swollen protuberances would grow over the ocean and gradually take on various shapes. Suddenly, I noticed that my camera was offset towards the wall of fog, I had to manoeuvre against the wind and, when I could look down again, I saw something that looked like a garden. Yes, a garden. Trees, hedges, paths - but it wasn't a real garden; it was all made of the same stuff, which had now completely hardened and looked like yellow plaster. Beneath the garden, the ocean shone. I went down, as low as I could, to observe this garden closely. Question: Did the trees and plants you saw have leaves? Berton's answer: No, they were rough shapes - like a model garden. Yes! A model. That's exactly what it was. A model, but life-size. After a moment the model began to shatter, to break, to split into black cracks, from which a thick, mucusy liquid was escaping, flowing or pooling on the spot. The tremors increased, there was a prodigious boiling and everything was buried under the foam. At the same time, the fog walls were closing in; I increased the speed and went out to 300 metres. Question: Are you absolutely sure that you saw something that reminded you of a garden - a garden, without any other possible interpretation? Answer: Yes. I noticed several details. I remember, for example, that in one place there were boxes

lined up. Later I realised that it was probably an apiary. Question: You understood later? But at the time, when you saw them? Answer by Berton: No, because everything was like plaster. But I saw something else. Question: What? Answer from Berton: I saw some objects, which I can't give a precise name to, because I didn't have time to observe them properly. Under some bushes, I thought I could see tools, elongated objects with teeth. They looked like plaster casts of our little garden tools. But I am not absolutely sure. But I'm sure - yes, I'm sure I recognised an apiary. Question: You didn't think it was a hallucination? Berton's answer: No. I thought it was a hallucination. I thought it was a mirage. I didn't think it was a hallucination, because I felt very well, and I had never seen anything like it before. When I went back up to 300 metres, and looked at the fog again, it had more holes in it, irregular holes - imagine, if you like, a slice of cheese. Some of these holes were completely hollowed out and I could see the waves of the ocean; others were just large buckets, where something was bubbling up. I went down one of the shafts and - the altimeter read forty - I saw a wall lying below the surface of the ocean - but not very deep - the wall of a huge building; I could see it clearly through the waves; it had several rows of rectangular openings, windows; it even seemed to me that something was stirring behind some of the windows. But I'm not quite sure. The wall slowly rose and emerged from the ocean. A mucous liquid, veined with compact bulges, trickled profusely and flowed down the wall. Suddenly the wall broke in two, sank into the depths of the ocean and disappeared.


I climbed back up and continued to fly over the fog, almost skimming it with my camera. I discovered another well, much larger than the previous one. From a distance I had already noticed a clear, almost white, floating form; I had immediately thought that it was Fechner's suit, especially as I vaguely recognised a human form, and I had abruptly turned, for fear of losing my way and not finding the place again. This form, this body, was moving; sometimes it seemed to be swimming, sometimes it seemed to be standing, in the hollow of the wave. I was hurrying; I got so low that my camera bounced gently - it had probably hit the crest of the big wave I was overlooking. This body - yes, it was a human body, without a suit - this body was moving. Question: Did you see his face? Answer by Berton: Yes. Question: Who was it? Answer by Berton: It was a child. Question: What child? Had you ever seen him before? Answer from Berton: No. I've never seen him before. In any case, I don't remember ever having seen him. Besides, when I got closer - when I got within forty metres, or even before - I noticed that it was no ordinary child. Question: What do you mean by that? Berton's answer: I'll explain. I didn't immediately understand what was troubling me, I only understood after a while: this child was extraordinarily tall. Huge, to say the least. Lying horizontally, his body rose, I believe, four metres above the ocean. I remember that when I hit the wave his face was a little higher than mine, and yet in my cabin I must have been at least three metres above the ocean. Question: If he was so tall, why do you say he was a child? Berton's answer: Because he was a very small child. Question: Don't you realise, Berton, that your answer lacks logic?


Answer by Berton: No, absolutely not. I could see his face, he was a very young child. Moreover, the proportions of the body corresponded exactly to the proportions of a child's body. It was a... an infant. No, I'm exaggerating. He was maybe two or three years old. He had black hair, and blue eyes, huge! He was naked, completely naked - like a newborn baby. He was wet, or rather glazed; his skin was glowing. I was terribly upset. I no longer believed in a mirage. I could see this child so clearly. He was rising and falling, following the movement of the wave; but apart from this general movement of the body, he was moving, it was horrible! Question: Why? What was he doing? Berton's answer: It looked like a museum doll, but a living doll. He opened and closed his lips, he made different gestures, horrible gestures. Yes, because they were not his own gestures. Question: What do you mean by that? Berton's answer: I was looking at him from twenty metres away - I suppose I didn't get any closer. But, as I told you, it was huge. I saw him very clearly. Its eyes were shining, and you could really have thought it was a living child, if it hadn't been for those movements, those gestures that someone seemed to be trying to make... it looked as if someone else was practising those gestures... Question: Try to clarify your thinking! Berton's answer: It's difficult. I'm talking about an impression, an intuition. I wasn't thinking, but I knew that these gestures were not natural. Question: Do you mean, for example, that the hands did not move as human hands can move, because of the limited flexibility of the joints? Answer by Berton: No, absolutely not. But... these movements made no sense. Each of our movements means something, serves a purpose...


Question: Do you think so? The movements of an infant have little meaning. Berton's answer: I know. But the movements of an infant are disordered, confused, muddled. The movements I observed... ah! - yes, that's it - they were methodical movements. They were carried out successively, grouped in series. It was as if someone had wanted to study what the child was capable of doing with his hands, his chest, his mouth. The face was more terrible than the rest, because the face has an expression, and this face... I don't know how to say it. It was alive, yes, but not human. Or rather, the features, as a whole, yes, the eyes, and the complexion, but the expression, the movements of the face, no! Question: Were they grimaces? Do you know what happens to a man's face during an epileptic fit? Berton's answer: Yes. I have seen an epileptic fit. I understand that. No, it was something different. Epilepsy causes spasms, convulsions. The movements I'm talking about were fluid, continuous, graceful - melodious, if you can say that about a movement. That's the most precise definition. But that face... A face cannot be divided into two - one half happy and the other sad, one half threatening and the other kind, one half afraid and the other half triumphant. With this child it was like that. Moreover, all the movements and changes of expression followed one another with inconceivable rapidity. I was down there for a very short time. Maybe ten seconds, maybe less than ten seconds. Question: And you claim to have seen all this in such a short time? Besides, how do you know how long you were there, did you check your stopwatch? Berton's answer: No, I didn't check my stopwatch, but I have been flying for sixteen years. In my profession, we instinctively measure the duration of what we call a moment, to the nearest second. This is a skill that you acquire and that is indispensable for proper navigation. A pilot will never be worth much who does not know, regardless of the circumstances, whether a phenomenon lasts five or

ten seconds. The same applies to observation. We learn, over the years, to see everything in the shortest time. Question: Is that all you have seen? Berton's answer: No, but I don't remember the rest so exactly. I suppose I had already seen too much - my attention waned. The fog started to close in around me and I had to go back up. I went back up - for the first time in my life I almost flipped. My hands were shaking so badly, I could hardly hold the controls. I think I shouted something, called the base - I knew we weren't connected by radio. Question: Did you then try to get back? Berton's answer: No. Finally, when I got to the top of the hill, I was able to get back to the base. Finally, when I got to the top, I thought that maybe Fechner was at the bottom of one of those holes. I know it sounds crazy. But that's what I thought. I thought that anything was possible, and that it would also be possible for me to find Fechner. I decided to go down every hole I could find on my way. On my third attempt I gave up. When I came back up, I realised that it was useless to insist, after what I had just seen, this third time. I could not continue. I must add - the fact is already known - that I suffered from nausea and that I threw up in my cabin. I didn't understand anything. I had never felt sick before. Remark: It was a symptom of intoxication, Berton. Berton's answer: Maybe. I don't know. But what I saw that third time, I didn't imagine it, it wasn't the effect of intoxication. Question: How do you know? Answer by Berton: It was not a hallucination. A hallucination is created by my own brain, right? Remark: Yes. Berton's answer: Well, my brain couldn't have created what I saw. I would never believe it. My brain would not have been able to do it. Remark: Tell us what it was all about!


Berton's answer: First I would like to know how the statements I have already made will be interpreted. Question: What does it matter? Answer by Berton: For me it is of the utmost importance. I said that I saw things that I will never forget. If the commission recognises, even with reservations, that my testimony is plausible, and that the ocean should be studied - I mean, by directing the research according to my statements - then I will say everything. But if the commission considers it to be a delusion, I will say nothing more. Question: Why? Berton's answer: Because the content of my hallucinations belongs to me and I don't have to account for it. But I do have to account for what I have observed on Solaris. Question: Does this mean that you refuse to answer any further questions until the competent office of the expedition has made its decision? Do you understand that the commission is obviously not entitled to make an immediate decision? Berton's answer: "Yes. This was the end of the first minutes. This was followed by a fragment of the second minutes, drawn up eleven days later. "The Chairman: ... after deliberation, the commission - composed of three doctors, three biologists, a physicist, a mechanical engineer and the deputy head of the expedition - has come to the conclusion that Berton's report presents a hallucinatory syndrome of intoxication by the planet's atmosphere, a characterized morbid syndrome, consecutive to an irritation of the associative zone of the cerebral crust, and that Berton's account does not reflect any part, or at least no appreciable part, of the reality Berton: Excuse me, what does "no part, or at least no appreciable part" mean? How much of reality is appreciable or not? The Chairman: I haven't finished. In addition to these conclusions, the committee duly recorded a votum separatum from Mr. Archibald Messenger, Doctor of Physics,

who believes the phenomena described by Berton to be objectively possible and is in favour of a scrupulous verification. That is all. Berton: I repeat my question. The Chairman: The answer is simple. "No appreciable part" means that phenomena that were actually observed may have served as a support for your hallucinations. During a night walk, a perfectly sane man believes he recognises a living being in a bush shaken by the wind. All the more reason why the explorer, lost on an alien planet and exposed to a poisonous atmosphere, should not have such illusions. This judgment is not prejudicial to you, Berton. Would you be so kind as to inform us of your decision now? Berton: I would first like to know the consequences of this votum separatum of Dr. Messenger. The Chair: Practically none. We shall continue the work along the lines originally established. Berton: Is our discussion recorded? The Chairman: Yes. Berton: Then I would like to say that the commission is not prejudicial to me, but to the very spirit of the expedition. Therefore, as I have already stated, I will not answer any further questions. The Chairman: Is that all? Berton: Yes, but I would like to meet Dr. Messenger. Is that possible? The Chairman: Of course. Here ended the second minutes. At the bottom of the page there was a note in small print: the next day, Dr. Messenger had spoken for almost three hours with Berton. Following this conversation, Messenger had again asked the Expedition Board to undertake research in order to verify the pilot's statements. The pilot had revealed new, extremely convincing facts - which Messenger could not disclose until the Council had made a positive decision. The Council - Shannahan, Timolis and Trahier - denied the motion and the case was closed.

The book still contained a photocopy of the last page of a letter - the draft of a letter - found by the executor of the estate after Messenger's death. Ravintzer, despite his research, did not know if this letter had ever been sent. "... obtuse minds, pyramid of stupidity. - So began the text. - "In order to preserve its authority, the Council - specifically Shannahan and Timolis (Trahier's voice does not count) - rejected my recommendations. Now I am addressing the Institute directly; but, as you can imagine, my protests will not convince anyone. Bound by oath, I cannot, unfortunately, tell you what Berton told me. If the Council has disregarded Berton's testimony, it is mainly because Berton has no scientific training - whereas any scientist could envy the presence of mind and the gift of observation of this pilot. Please send me the following information by return mail: 1) Fechner's biography, including details of his childhood. 2) Everything you know about his family, facts and dates - he probably lost his parents as a child. 3) Topography of the place where he was brought up. I would still like to tell you what I think about all this. As you know, some time after Fechner and Carucci left, a spot appeared at the centre of the red sun; this chromospheric eruption threw a shower of energetic particles mainly - according to the information provided by the satelloid - towards the southern hemisphere, where our base was located, and the radio link was broken. While the other teams explored the planet's surface within a relatively small radius, Fechner and Carucci moved considerably away from the base. Never since our arrival on the planet and until that fateful day had we observed such constant fog and silence.

I suppose Berton has seen some phases of 'Operation Man' undertaken by this slimy monster. At the origin of all the forms Berton saw was Fechner - or rather his brain, subjected to an inconceivable 'psychic dissection', for a re-creation, an experimental reconstruction, from imprints (among the most enduring, surely) etched in his memory. I know it sounds fantastic, I know I could be wrong. Please help me! I am currently on Alaric, where I will await your answer. Your turn, 4." It was dark and I struggled to make out the printed characters, which were fading at the top of the grey page - the last page concerning the adventure of the pilot Berton. My own experience led me to regard Berton as a reliable witness. I turned to the window. My gaze plunged into a purple abyss; a few clouds still glowed with a faint ember over the horizon. I could not see the ocean, covered in shadow. The ribbons of paper waved lazily under the grid of the fans; the warm air, still and silent, tasted slightly of ozone. There was nothing heroic about our decision to stay on the Station. The time for heroes was over, the time for great interplanetary victories, the time for daring expeditions, the time for sacrifice - Fechner, the first victim of the ocean, was a thing of the past. I almost didn't care anymore who was Snaut's or Sartorius's "visitor". Soon, I thought, we will stop being ashamed, stop isolating ourselves. If we cannot get rid of our 'visitors', we will get used to their company, live with them. If their Creator changes the rules of the game, we will adapt to the new rules, even if we start out resisting, rebelling - even if one of them is a "bad guy".

even if one of us gives in to discouragement and kills himself. Eventually, a certain balance will be restored. The night had come, like so many nights on earth. All I could see were the white outlines of the sink and the smooth surface of the mirror. I stood up. I groped around among the objects that cluttered the washbasin shelf. I found the box of cotton wool. I washed my face with a damp pad and went to lie down on the bed... A moth flapped its wings - no, it was the ribbon of the fan. The buzzing stopped, then started again. I could no longer see the window, everything blurred into darkness. A ray of light, falling from I don't know where, crossed the space and lingered in front of me - on the wall, or on the black sky? I remembered how frightened I had been the night before by the empty gaze of the night; I smiled at my fear. I was no longer afraid of that look. I was not afraid of anything. I lifted my wrist and consulted the crown of phosphorescent numbers. One more hour and it would be the dawn of the blue day. I breathed deeply; I savoured the darkness; I was empty, free of thought. As I moved, I felt the flat shape of the tape recorder against my hip. Gibarian... his voice immortalized in reels of wire. I had forgotten to resurrect him, to listen to him - the only thing I could do for him now! I took the tape recorder out of my pocket and hid it under the bed. I heard a rustle and the door opened. - Kris? - A worried voice whispered my name. - Kris, are you there? It's so dark... I said: - I'm here, don't be afraid, come on!
