The light woke me up in the middle of the night. With one hand in my visor, I raised myself on my elbow. Wrapped in a sheet, her hair in her face, Harey huddled at the foot of the bed. Her shoulders were shaking. She was crying silently. - Harey! - She shrank further into herself. - Harey, what's wrong with you? I sat up, badly awake, still overwhelmed by the nightmare that had plagued me a moment earlier. She was still shaking. I put my arms out. She pushed me away and hid her face. - Harey, my love... - Shut up! - Harey! Harey! What's the matter? She showed her wet, quivering face. Big tears, childish tears, ran down her cheeks, sparkled in the dimple above her chin, dripped onto the sheet. - You don't want me. - What are you making up? - I heard. I felt my jaw muscles twitch: - What did you hear? You didn't understand... - I understood, I understood very well. You said it wasn't me. You want me to leave. I would leave, my God! I would leave, but I can't. I don't know why. I've tried to leave. I just can't. I'm such a, such a coward! - Come on, little one! I grabbed her, held her to me with all my strength. She was all I cared about; the rest fell away. I kissed her hands, her fingers wet with tears; I spoke to her, I begged her to listen to me, I asked for her indulgence, I repeated

I told her that she had had a stupid dream, a horrible dream. She gradually calmed down. She stopped crying. Her eyes were huge, the eyes of a sleepwalker. She turned her head away. - No, she said, shut up, don't talk like that, you mustn't! You're not the same for me... I let out a groan: - What! - No, you don't want me. I understood that a long time ago. I pretended not to notice. I thought that maybe I was imagining things. But no... you're not the same. You don't take me seriously. A dream? Yes, it's true, but it was you who was dreaming, and you were dreaming of me. You said my name with revulsion. Why did you say it? Why... I knelt down and hugged her legs: - My little one... - I don't want you to talk to me like that! I don't want you to talk to me like that, you hear? I'm not your child, I'm not a child. I'm... She burst into tears and fell face down into the pillow. I got up. The fans hummed softly. I was cold. I threw the bathrobe over my shoulders and sat down next to Harey; I touched his arm: "Listen, Harey! I'm going to tell you something. I'm going to tell you the truth. She sat up, using both hands. I could see the veins pulsing under the thin skin of her neck. Again I felt the muscles in my jaw twitch. I was getting colder and colder. My head was completely empty. - The truth?" asked Harey. Word of honour? My throat tightened and I didn't answer immediately. Word of honour - our sacred formula, our old oath formula! The oath thus sealed, neither of us dared to lie or say anything. I remembered the time when we used to torment each other, out of an excessive concern for sincerity, convinced that this naive quest for the truth preserved our union. I replied gravely:

- Word of honour. Harey... - She was waiting. - You too, Harey, have changed. We all change. But that's not what I wanted to tell you. For some reason that neither of us know exactly, it seems that... you can't leave me. That's good for me, because I can't leave you either... - Kris! I lifted her, still wrapped in her sheet. A tear-soaked corner of the sheet brushed the back of my neck. I walked up and down and rocked Harey. She stroked my cheeks. - No, you haven't changed. It's me," she whispered in my ear. Something's not right. Maybe it's since the accident? She looked at the black, empty rectangle of the door. The night before, I had taken the debris to the warehouse. A new door would have to be hung. I settled Harey on the bed. Leaning over her, I asked: "Do you ever sleep? - I don't know. - What do you mean you don't know? - I have dreams... I don't know if they're really dreams. Maybe I'm ill. I lie there and think and... She shivered. I asked quietly, "What? - I have strange thoughts. I don't know where they come from. I asked again, "For example? And I said to myself: "Whatever she says, keep calm! I prepared myself for her answer as one prepares for a blow. She shook her head in confusion: "These are thoughts... around me... - I don't understand. - I don't understand. I have the impression that they are not only inside me, but further away. I can't explain, I can't find words...

I cut off, almost in spite of myself: - They must be dreams... - Then I caught my breath and continued. Then I drew a breath and continued: "Now we'll turn out the light and, until the morning, no more sorrows! Tomorrow morning, if you like, we'll make up new ones - well? She flicked the switch, and darkness separated us. I lay down on the bed; a warm breath was coming towards me. I hugged her; she whispered: - Harder! - And after a long moment: Kris! - What? - I love you. I almost screamed.

The morning was red. The blistering disc of the sun was rising on the horizon. A letter was waiting for me on the threshold. I tore open the envelope. I could hear Harey humming in the bathroom. From time to time she would poke her head inside the room and show me her face covered with wet hair. I went to the window and read: "Kelvin, it's starting. Sartorius has decided on an aggressive treatment. He believes he will succeed in destabilising the neutrino structures. He would like to examine a certain amount of F-plasma subjected to peripheral transport. He suggests that you go on a reconnaissance trip and take a certain amount of plasma with you in the capsule. It's up to you, but let me know what you decide. I don't have an opinion. I don't seem to have anything left. If I prefer you to accept, then at least we will have the impression of taking a step forward. Otherwise, all that's left is to envy G.
YOUR OLD RAT.

P.S. Don't go into the radio booth - that's all I ask. You can phone." My heart sank as I read this letter. I read it carefully once more, then tore it up and threw the pieces of paper into the sink. I chose a combination for Harey. I repeated the gestures of the abominable comedy I had imagined the other day. But Harey knew nothing. When I told her that I was going to scout, and offered her to accompany me, she was very much looking forward to the trip. We stopped in the kitchen and together we prepared breakfast. Harey ate very little. When the meal was over, I went to the library and Harey followed me. Before carrying out Sartorius's desired mission, I wanted to take a look at the literature on magnetic fields and neutrino structures. Without yet knowing how I was going to proceed, I had decided to exercise control over the work of the eminent physicist. Of course, I thought, when the annihilator was perfected, I would not prevent Snaut and Sartorius from "delivering themselves"; I could take Harey with me, and we would wait for the operation to be completed somewhere outside the Station - in the cabin of a flying vehicle. I struggled on the big computer; sometimes it responded to my operations by ejecting a card with the terse inscription "Missing from the catalogue"; sometimes it suggested drowning me in such a cataract of highly specialised physics books that I hesitated to take advantage of its advice. I didn't want to leave the vast circular room, though; I felt at home in my egg, between the rows of drawers crammed with microfilms and electrical recordings. Located in the very centre of the Station, the library had no windows; it was the best insulated place inside the steel shell. This, no doubt, was why I felt so good, despite the obvious failure of my research. Wandering through the huge room, I found myself standing in front of a ceiling-high shelf with about six hundred volumes on its shelves, all classics concerning the history of

Solaris, starting with the nine volumes of Giese's monumental and already relatively outdated monograph. This was certainly not an ostentatious display, highly unlikely here, but a respectful tribute to the memory of the pioneers. I took out Giese's heavy volumes and, sitting on the arm of a chair, began to leaf through them. Harey, too, had found some reading material; over her shoulder I read a few lines. She had chosen one of the many books taken by the first expedition, The Interplanetary Cook, a volume that may have belonged to Giese personally. Harey was carefully studying the culinary recipes adapted to the harsh conditions of cosmonautics; I said nothing and returned to the esteemed book I was holding in my lap. Solaris - Ten Years of Exploration had been published in the Solariana series, volumes 4 to 13, while the numbering of the latest books published in the same series was four digits. Giese lacked lyricism; but in the study of Solaris, a lyrical viewpoint can only hinder the explorer. Imagination and premature assumptions are particularly harmful when dealing with a planet where, in the end, anything is possible. It is very likely that the implausible descriptions of the 'plasma' metamorphoses of the ocean accurately reflect the observed phenomena, although these descriptions are uncontrollable, as the ocean rarely repeats itself. The strange character, the gigantism of these phenomena fills the first-time observer with dread, and he would consider similar phenomena as a mere "caprice of nature" - an accidental manifestation of blind forces - if he were to observe them on a smaller scale, in some mire. In short, the genius and the mediocre mind remain equally perplexed by the inexhaustible diversity of solar formations - no man has really familiarised himself with the phenomena of the living ocean. Giese was not a mediocre mind, not a genius either. He was a pedantic classifier, one of those whose untiring dedication to his work completely absorbs him and preserves him from the tumult of life. He

He used relatively banal descriptive language, which he supplemented with terms of his own invention, which were inadequate and even misguided. But, let's face it, no terminology can express what happens on Solaris. Tree-mountains', 'longus', 'fungus', 'mimoids', 'symmetriads' and 'asymmetriads', 'vertebrates' and 'agilus' have a terribly artificial linguistic physiognomy; these bastard terms do, however, give an idea of Solaris to anyone who has only ever seen blurry photographs and very imperfect films of the planet. In fact, despite his circumspection, our scrupulous classifier has more than once erred on the side of caution. Man never ceases to make assumptions, even when he shies away from them and believes himself immune to temptation. Giese considered the longus to be a category of fundamental forms; he compared them to gigantic wave accumulations and compared the formation of the longus to the flowing movements of our land oceans. It is enough to refer to the first edition of his work to see that he had first called them "flows", inspired by a geocentrism that could be considered amusing, if one did not notice that this geocentrism explicitly betrays the embarrassment of the scientist. As long as one seeks to establish comparisons with the Earth, it must be specified that the "longus" are formations whose dimensions exceed those of the great caðon of Colorado, that they occur in a material which on the surface has an appearance of foamy colloid (in the course of this fantastic "work" the foam freezes in festoons of lace with enormous meshes; Some scholars speak of "ossified cankers"), while at depth the substance becomes firmer and firmer, like a bandaged muscle, a muscle which, fifteen metres from the surface, is as hard as rock and yet retains its suppleness. The "longus" itself, an apparently independent creation, stretches for kilometres - between distended membranous walls to which the "ossified excrescences" cling - a colossal python, which would have devoured mountains and which silently digests, printing

its crawling body with a slow, vibrating movement from time to time. The "longus" only looks like a passive reptile when you fly over it from a great height. When you get closer, and the two "ravine walls" dominate the flying apparatus by a few hundred metres, you will notice that this inflated cylinder, stretched to the horizon, is animated by a vertiginous movement. At first, one notices the continuous rotation of a sort of grey-green sludge, which violently reflects the sun's rays; but, if the apparatus descends further until it almost touches the "back of the python" (the edges of the "ravine" sheltering the "longus" are then similar to the ridges bordering a geological subsidence), one notices that it is a much more complicated movement, made up of concentric swirls where darker currents intersect; At times, this 'mantle' becomes a shiny crust, reflecting the sky and clouds, and immediately riddled by the detonating eruptions of internal gases and fluids. Gradually, it became clear that this was the centre of the forces that were pushing apart and lifting the two slowly crystallising gelatinous sides towards the sky; but science did not accept such evidence without further proof. Over the years, heated discussions have continued on a priority theme: what exactly is going on inside the 'longus', which criss-cross the vastness of the living ocean in their millions? These 'longus' were thought to have organic functions; they were said to be involved in the transformation of matter; some suggested that they were involved in respiratory processes; others suggested that they were involved in the transport of foodstuffs. The dust of the libraries has buried the infinite repertoire of suppositions. Tedious and sometimes dangerous experiments eliminated all these hypotheses. Today, we only talk about 'longus', relatively simple and stable formations, whose existence is measured in weeks - an exceptional feature among the phenomena observed on the planet. Mimoids' are significantly more complex, more fanciful formations that provoke a more vehement reaction from the observer - a reaction that is not always the case.

instinctive reaction, it goes without saying. It is no exaggeration to say that Giese fell in love with the "mimoids" and soon devoted all his time to their study, description and definition until the end of his life. By the name he gave to these phenomena, he wanted to express their most disturbing characteristic - the imitation of objects, close or distant, outside the ocean. One fine day, a large, flattened, crumbling, tar-coated disc was seen buried beneath the surface of the ocean. After a few hours, the disc begins to decompose into leaves, which gradually rise. The observer then thinks he is witnessing a furious struggle. From all directions, powerful waves, like convulsed lips, fleshy jaws, rush in, opening greedily over the shredded and wavering sheet, then sinking into the depths. Each time a wave crater collapses and engulfs, the fall of this mass of a hundred thousand tons is accompanied for a second by a viscous roar, a monstrous thunderclap. The bituminous sheet is pushed down, jostled, dismembered; with each new assault, circular films scatter and hover, undulating and languid wings, under the surface of the ocean; They transform into pear-shaped clusters, long necklaces, merge with each other and rise again, carrying in their folds lumpy fragments of the base of the primitive disc, while around them the waves continue to crumble at the sides of a widening crater. The phenomenon may last a day; it may last a month; and sometimes it remains without consequences. The conscientious Giese had called this first variant the "aborted mimoid", because he was convinced that each of these cataclysms was aimed at an ultimate end, the "major mimoid", a colony of polypiers (the whole of which exceeded the surface area of a city), pale outgrowths assigned to imitate the forms outside the ocean. Uyvens, on the other hand, considered this last phase to be a degeneration, a necrosis; according to him, the appearance of "copies" corresponded to a loss of


The appearance of the "copies" corresponded to a localized loss of the ocean's own forces, which no longer controlled the original forms it had created. Giese, however, persisted in seeing the various phases of the process as a continuous process towards perfection; he displayed a confidence that was all the more surprising, given that he was usually overly measured and cautious when he proposed - with the boldness of an ant advancing over a frozen waterfall - the slightest hypothesis concerning the other creations of the ocean. Seen from above, the mimoid looks like a city; it is only an illusion, caused by our need to draw analogies with what we know. When the sky is clear, a mass of superheated air covers the flexible structures of the polypiers piled on top of each other and topped with membranous palisades with a vibrating envelope. The first cloud that crosses the azure (I said "azure", but here the sky is purple, or eerily white during the "blue" day), the first cloud that passes wakes the mimoid. All the outgrowths suddenly develop new buds; then the whole of the polypiers projects a large integument upwards, which expands, swells, swells, fades and, after a few minutes, imitates the scroll of a cloud. The enormous 'object' casts a reddish shadow on the mimoid, the tops of which tilt towards each other, this movement always taking place in the opposite direction to that of the real cloud. If he had learned from his sacrifice why this was so, I suppose Giese would have gladly had his hand cut off. But these "isolated" productions of the mimoid are nothing compared to the impetuous activity it displays when "stimulated" by objects of human origin. The reproduction process embraces all objects within a radius of eight to nine miles. Most often the reproduction is an enlargement of the original, whose forms are sometimes copied very roughly. The reproduction of machines, in particular, gives rise to simplifications that could be considered grotesque, even caricatural. The copy of the object is always modelled in this colourless integument, which hovers over the protuberances, linked to the original.

The copy of the object is always modelled in this colourless integument, which hovers above the protuberances, connected to its base only by tenuous umbilical cords, and which slides and crawls, which folds, stretches or inflates, and finally takes on the most complicated forms. A flying machine, a grid or a mast are reproduced at the same speed. However, humans do not stimulate the mimoid; more precisely, the mimoid does not react to any living matter and has never copied, for example, the plants that the researchers brought with them for experiments. On the other hand, the mimoid immediately reproduces a mannequin, a doll in human form, a statuette representing a dog or a tree sculpted from any material. Here we must point out, parenthetically, that the "obedience" of the mimoid to the solarist experimenters is not a token of "goodwill" - it is not constant. The most evolved mimoid has its lazy days, when it 'lives' in slow motion, when its pulse weakens. This 'pulse' is not discernible to the naked eye and has only been discovered with the help of film footage, with each ebb and flow of the 'pulse' extending over two hours. During these 'lazy days', the mimoid can easily be explored, especially if it is old, as both the base anchored in the ocean and the protrusions of this base have a relative firmness, which allows humans to land safely on the mimoid. In fact, one can also stay inside the mimoid during its "active days", but then visibility is almost nil, due to a whitish colloidal dust, which spreads continuously through the tears of the integument suspended above the protuberances. From close up, it is impossible to distinguish the shapes reproduced by this integument, because of their gigantic size - the dimensions of the smallest 'copy' are those of a mountain. Moreover, a thick layer of colloidal snow quickly covers the base of the mimoid; this muddy carpet only hardens after a few hours (the "frozen" crust can support the weight of a man, although it is made of a much lighter material than pumice). Ultimately, without appropriate equipment, there is a risk of

In the end, without the proper equipment, one risks getting lost in the labyrinth of gnarled and cracked structures, which sometimes look like curled-up colonnades, sometimes like frozen geysers. There is a risk of getting lost even in daylight, as the sun's rays do not penetrate the white ceiling projected into the atmosphere by the "imitative explosions". On good days (good days for the scientist as well as for the mimic), the observer contemplates an unforgettable spectacle. On these days of hyperproduction, the mimoid indulges in extraordinary 'creative outbursts'. He indulges in variations on the theme of external objects, which he likes to complicate and from which he develops "formal extensions"; he thus amuses himself for hours, to the joy of the non-figurative painter and the despair of the scholar, who tries in vain to understand anything about the processes underway. If, at times, the mimoid has 'childish' simplifications, it also has its 'baroque deviations', its magnificent fits of extravagance. The old mimoids, in particular, make very comical shapes. When I looked at the photographs, however, I was never inclined to laugh, so overwhelmed was I, each time, by their mystery. During the first years of exploration, people literally threw themselves on the mimoids - windows opened in the ocean, it was said, which would facilitate the ardently hoped-for contact between two civilisations. Soon enough, it had to be admitted that the famous contact had not been announced in any way, that everything was limited to a reproduction of forms, and that we were treading on a path leading nowhere. Many scholars, yielding to the temptation of a latent anthropomorphism or zoomorphism, saw in various other formations of the living ocean "sensory organs" or even "limbs" - this is how scholars (including Maartens and Ekkonai) defined Giese's "vertebrates" and "agilus" for a time. If one ventures to declare that these oceanic protuberances, which soar up to two miles into the atmosphere, are 'limbs', one might as well


earthquakes are the 'gymnastics' of the earth's crust! Three hundred chapters make up the repertoire of formations that regularly occur on the surface of the living ocean, and which can be observed by the dozens, even hundreds, in twenty-four hours. Symmetriads - according to the terminology and definition of the Giese school - are the least 'human' formations, i.e. they bear no resemblance to anything that man can see on Earth. At the time when the study of symmetriads was undertaken, it was already known that the ocean was not aggressive and that its plasma eddies would not engulf anyone except a remarkably careless and thoughtless individual (I am not, of course, talking about accidents resulting from a failure of the oxygenation system, for example, or of the air conditioners). It is indeed possible to fly through the cylindrical body of the longus or the fantastic column of vertebrates oscillating among the clouds without the slightest danger, for the plasma moves away at the speed of sound in the solar atmosphere, and clears a passage for the foreign body; deep tunnels even open up under the surface of the ocean (the instantaneous energy deployed for this purpose is prodigious - Skriabin estimated it at approximately 1019 ergs). However, the exploration of the symmetries was begun with increased caution, avoiding any reckless incursion and multiplying precautions - precautions that were often illusory. Every child on Earth knows the names of the first men who ventured into the abyss of a symmetriad. The danger of these giant formations does not lie in their appearance, although this can inspire nightmares. Rather, the danger lies in the fact that inside a symmetriad there is nothing that is stable or secure in any way - even the laws of physics are abolished. It is worth noting that the explorers of the symmetriads were more ardent than other scientists in supporting the thesis that the living ocean was endowed with intelligence.


Symmetriads suddenly appear. The birth of a symmetriad is similar to an eruption. An hour before the 'eruption', the ocean begins to glow, glazed over an area of a few dozen square kilometres. However, it remains fluid and the rhythm of the waves does not change. Sometimes, but not necessarily, this vitrification phenomenon occurs around the funnel left by an agilus. After an hour, the shiny envelope of the ocean flies away and forms a monstrous bubble, which reflects the firmament, the sun, the clouds and the whole horizon, a spray of changing and diaphanous images. The light rays, broken and deflected, create a dazzling play of colours. The light effects on a symmetrical picture are particularly striking during the blue day and at sunset. It is as if the planet is giving birth to a double, which increases in size from moment to moment. And suddenly the huge flaming globe, having just spread out over the ocean, bursts at the top and splits vertically, but this is not a disintegration. This second phase, rather inappropriately called the 'floral calyx phase', lasts a few seconds. The membranous arches pointing towards the sky fold inwards and merge into a squat torso, within which a multitude of phenomena continue. At the centre of this torso - explored for the first time by the seventy members of the Hamalei expedition - a gigantic process of polycrystallisation erects an axis, commonly called the 'spine', a term of which I am not a fan. The vertiginous architectonics of this central pillar is supported in statu nascendi by vertical shafts, of an almost liquid gelatinous consistency, which continually spring from disproportionate crevices. During this process, the colossus - surrounded by a belt of snowy foam, the large bubbles of which are violently agitated - emits a continuous and dull roar. From the centre to the periphery, the complicated revolutions of heavy fins take place, on top of which are thickening trails of ductile material rising from the depths. Simultaneously, the gelatinous geysers turn into columns

These bundles of antennae, directed towards points of the structure rigorously determined by the overall dynamics, are reminiscent of the gills of an embryo and swirl at a fabulous speed, flooded with streams of pink blood and a dark green, almost black secretion. From this moment on, the symmetriad begins to reveal its most extraordinary feature - the ability to 'shape' or even negate certain physical laws. First of all, let us say that no two symmetriads are identical and that the geometry of each one is always a new "invention" of the living ocean. The interior of the symmetriad becomes a factory producing "monumental machines", as these creations are often called, although they are not at all reminiscent of man-made machines; this is an activity with limited ends and is therefore in a way "mechanical". When the geysers gushing out of the abyss have congealed into columns or galleries and corridors running off in all directions, when the "membranes" have fixed themselves into an inextricable arrangement of landings, panels and vaults, the symmetriad justifies its name, for the whole structure is divided into two equal parts, each composed in an absolutely similar manner. After twenty to thirty minutes - sometimes with the axis tilted at an angle of eight to twelve degrees - the giant begins to descend slowly. (There are larger and smaller symmetries, but even the smallest, when the base is already submerged, still reach a height of some eight hundred metres and are visible from several miles away). Then the massive body gradually stabilises - the inclined axis returns to the vertical - and the partially submerged symmetriad finally comes to rest. It is then possible to explore it without danger, by entering, near the top, through one of the many siphons that pierce the cap, orifices of various conduits and channels. The symmetriad presents - in its entirety - the three-dimensional development of some transcendental equation.


It is well known that any equation can be expressed in the figurative language of higher geometry and its spatial representation constructed. The symmetriad, thus envisaged, is a relative of Lobachevsky's cones and Riemann's negative curves, but an extremely distant relative, because of its unimaginable complexity. It offers, in the form of a volume of some thousand cubes, an expansion of the whole mathematical system and, in fact, a four-dimensional expansion, because the fundamental terms of the equations are also expressed in time, in the changes that time brings about. It would be very natural, of course, to suppose that the symmetriad is a "mathematical machine" of the living ocean, a spatial representation - on the scale of the ocean - of the calculations it performs for purposes unknown to us; but no one today admits this idea of Fermont. The hypothesis, of course, was tempting; however, it proved impossible to maintain the concept of the ocean examining the problems of matter, the cosmos and existence, with titanic eruptions, whose substance would participate by each fragment in the infinitely complex expression of a higher analysis. Indeed, multiple phenomena contradict this too simple conception (of a childish naivety, according to some). There has been no shortage of attempts to transpose the symmetriad, to 'illustrate' it. Awerian's demonstration was a great success. Let us imagine, he said, an edifice dating from the splendour of Babylon, but built in a living substance, sensitive and capable of evolving; the architectonics of this edifice goes through a series of phases and takes before our eyes the forms of a Greek construction, then a Roman one; the columns, like vegetal stems, then become thinner, the vault lightens, rises, curves, the arch describes an abrupt parabola and breaks into a boom. Gothic is born, it reaches its maturity, time flies and new forms take shape; the austerity of the line disappears under the explosions of an orgiastic exuberance, the baroque blooms without restraint; if the progression continues, always being understood that we

If the progression continues, always on the understanding that we regard the successive mutations as stages in an evolutionary life, we finally arrive at the architecture of the cosmic epoch, and we may come to understand what a symmetriad is. However, whatever the developments and improvements made to the demonstration (attempts have been made to visualise it with models and films), the comparison remains weak; in fact, it is only a loophole, if not a deception, since the symmetriad resembles nothing we have ever seen on Earth... Man can only grasp a few things at a time; we can only see what is happening in front of us, here and now; we cannot simultaneously represent a succession of processes, however interrelated and complementary they may be to each other. Our faculties of perception are thus limited even with regard to relatively simple phenomena. The destiny of a single man may be rich in meaning; we have only a vague idea of the destiny of a few hundred men; but the history of thousands, of millions of men, means, strictly speaking, nothing at all. The symmetry is a million, no, a billion, raised to the power of X - that is the incomprehensible. What would we understand about these innumerable naves - each with a capacity of ten Kronecker units - that we explore, like ants, clinging to the folds of the vaults, breathing and contemplating the flight of gigantic spans, grey opalescences in the light of our projectors, flexible domes that interpenetrate and balance each other unerringly, perfection of a moment - for everything here passes and flows, movement is the essence of this architecture, concentrated and goal-oriented movement. We observe only a fragment of the process, the vibration of a single string in a symphony orchestra of supergiants; while we know - we know without conceiving - that above us and below us, in dizzying abysses, beyond the limits of perception of the eyes and imagination, thousands and millions of transformations are taking place simultaneously, linked together like a score by a

mathematical counterpoint. Someone spoke of a geometric symphony - we remain deaf to this concert. To really see something, one would have to step back, take a considerable distance; but everything happens inside the symmetriad - a colossal and proliferating matrix, where creation is incessant, where the created immediately becomes the creator, where perfectly identical "twins" are born on opposite sides, separated by Babelian scaffolding and miles of distance. Here, each monumental construction, with a beauty whose accomplishment escapes our sight, is the performer and the leader, the forms collaborate with each other and influence each other in turn. A symphony - yes, a symphony that creates itself and stops itself. The end of the symphony is horrible. All the witnesses have the feeling that they are witnessing a tragedy - a crime. After two or three hours - the process of spontaneous reproduction, of explosive proliferation, never lasts longer - the living ocean goes on the attack. The smooth surface of the ocean becomes animated and wrinkled, the parched foam becomes fluid again and begins to bubble. From all horizons come waves in concentric rows, fleshy jaws, incomparably larger than the fat lips that surround the mimoid at its birth. The submerged part of the symmetriad is compressed, the colossus rises, as if it were going to be thrown out of the planet's zone of attraction; the upper layers of the ocean redouble their activity, the waves rush higher and higher, lick the sides of the symmetriad, envelop it, stiffen up, clog the orifices; and all of this is nothing, compared to what happens inside the symmetriad First, the creative process - the evolutionary architectonics - freezes for a brief moment, and then there is a "panic". The supple movement of interpenetration of forms, the harmonious interplay of planes and lines, is rushed. One gets the overwhelming impression that the colossus, faced with the threatening danger, is trying to hasten some achievement. The more the movement of the transformations accelerates, the greater the horror inspired by the metamorphosis of the symmetriad and its dynamics. The flight

The admirable flight of the domes softens, the vaults sag and hang; "false notes" appear, unfinished, grotesque, "crippled" forms. From the invisible depths, a powerful roar escapes, a roar - a breath of air, a sigh of agony, rushes through the narrowed channels, snores and thunders, and the collapsed domes grumble like so many monstrous throats, bristling with stalactites of mucus, inert vocal cords. So the spectator, despite the movement that is unleashed with increased violence - a movement of obvious destruction - is seized by an invincible numbness. Only the hurricane rising from the abyss and inflating the thousands of galleries still lifts the high structure; soon it falls back and begins to melt. There are final palpitations, convulsions, blind and disordered jolts; attacked, eaten away, scoured, the giant slowly sinks and disappears, covered by swirls of foam. And what does all this mean? Yes, what does it mean? I remembered an incident from my days as Gibarian's assistant. A group of schoolchildren were visiting the Solarist Institute in Aden. The teenagers had walked through a side cabinet into the main library room and were staring at the microfilm boxes on the left side of the entrance, which took up one half of the large room. There, it was explained to them, among other phenomena immortalized by the image, were minute fragments of long-lost symmetriads - not single shots, but whole reels, and there were more than ninety thousand of them! A plump little girl, about fifteen years old, with a nose like a pair of glasses, a lively and determined look in her eyes, suddenly asked: - And what's the point of this? In the awkward silence that followed, the teacher merely gave her unruly pupil a stern look; among the solarists responsible for guiding the pupils (I was one of these guides), no one could answer. For no two symmetries are alike, and the phenomena that take place within a symmetriad are, in general, unpredictable. Sometimes,

no sound is produced. Sometimes the refractive index increases or decreases. Sometimes, rhythmic pulses cause a local change in gravitation, as if the symmetriad had a heart that beat as it gravitated. Sometimes the observers' compasses start to spin in circles; ionised layers appear and disappear... We could go on and on. Besides, if we ever manage to unlock the secret of symmetriads, we will still have asymmetriads! Asymmetriads are born in the same way as symmetriads, but their end is different, and in an asymmetriad one can hardly distinguish anything but quivering, vibrating and glittering. We know, however, that within an asymmetry, dizzying processes take place at a speed that defies the laws of physics, and these are called 'giant quantum phenomena'. The mathematical analogy of such phenomena with certain three-dimensional models of the atom is so unstable and elusive that some observers consider the similarity to be of secondary interest, if not purely accidental. Asymmetries have a very brief existence - fifteen to twenty minutes - and the end of an asymmetriad is even more horrible than the end of a symmetriad. With the tempestuous, howling blast that invades the asymmetriad, a fluid protrudes, gurgles hideously and submerges everything in a boil of dirty foam; then an explosion, accompanied by a muddy eruption, throws up a column of debris, which falls back at length in a cloudy rain on the agitated ocean. Within a radius of several tens of kilometres around the explosion site, such debris can be found, carried by the wind, dried out, yellow, flattened and similar to cartilaginous fragments. Much rarer, difficult to observe and of very variable duration, some creations are completely detached from the ocean. The first remains of these 'freelancers' were identified - wrongly, it was later shown - as the remains of creatures living in the depths of the ocean. The self-contained forms are generally reminiscent of multi-winged birds, fleeing from the shifting trunks of the agilus; but the

notions imported from Earth do not help to penetrate the mysteries of this planet. Sometimes, as an exceptional apparition on the rocky shore of an island, one distinguishes strange seal-like bodies, which wallow in the sun or lazily drag themselves towards the ocean, into which they are integrated. We were not leaving the man-made notions of Earth. As for a first contact... Explorers travelled hundreds of kilometres into the depths of the symmetries, set up recording devices and automatic cameras. Artificial satellites televised the budding of mimoids and longus, faithfully reporting images of maturation and annihilation. Libraries were overflowing, archives were growing, and the price to pay for all this documentation was often very expensive. Cataclysms engulfed a total of seven hundred and eighteen men who had not left the doomed colossi in time. In one infamous disaster, one hundred and six people died, including Giese himself, who was seventy years old at the time; the expedition was investigating a clearly defined symmetriad, which was suddenly destroyed in a process of extermination peculiar to asymmetriads. In two seconds, an eruption of sticky muck engulfed seventy-nine men, their machines and their aircraft; twenty-seven other observers, flying over the area in planes and helicopters, were also swept into the abyss. The site of the disaster, at the intersection of the 42nd parallel and the 89th meridian, is now known as the Hundred and Sixth Eruption. However, the memory of this cataclysm, of which no trace remains in the ocean, can only be found on maps. In the aftermath of the Hundred and Sixth Eruption, for the first time in the history of solar studies, there were petitions demanding a thermonuclear attack on the ocean. This retaliation would have been more cruel than revenge, since it was to destroy what we did not understand. Although it was never officially acknowledged, it is likely that Tsanken's ultimatum influenced the negative outcome of the vote. Tsanken

commanded Giese's reserve team - a transmission error had spared his life; he had wandered over the ocean and arrived near the scene of the disaster a few minutes after the explosion, from which he could still see the black mushroom. When he learned of the planned nuclear attack, he threatened to blow up the Station with the nineteen survivors who had taken refuge there. Today, there are only three of us left in the Station... Controlled by satellites, the construction of the Station was a technical operation of which men could be proud; but the ocean, in a few seconds, raises infinitely more considerable structures. The Station is a disc with a radius of one hundred metres; it has four floors in the centre and two floors around the perimeter; it is held between five hundred and one thousand five hundred metres above the ocean by gravitational pulls to compensate for the forces of attraction. In addition to all the devices available to the ordinary Stations and the large satelloids of other planets, the Solaris Station is equipped with special radars, sensitive to the first change in the ocean surface, which trigger a back-up energy allowing the steel disc to rise into the stratosphere as soon as there are the first signs of a new plasma construction. Yes, today, despite the presence of our faithful 'visitors', the Station was singularly depopulated. Since the robots had been locked up on the lower floor, in the warehouses - for some reason I didn't know yet - we walked around without meeting anyone, along the corridors of a ghost ship, abandoned by its crew and whose machines were still running. When I placed the ninth volume of Giese's monograph on its shelf, it seemed to me that the steel floor, covered with plastic foam, had vibrated under my feet. I stood still, but the vibration did not repeat itself. Since the library was perfectly isolated from the other rooms, this vibration could only have one origin: a rocket had just left the Station. This thought brought me back to reality. I had not yet decided to go out, as Sartorius wanted. At

pretending to fully approve of his plan, I was at most postponing the start of hostilities, since I was determined to save Harey. But did Sartorius have any chance of success? In any case, he had enormous advantages over me - he was a physicist, he knew the problem much better than I did. I could only rely, paradoxically, on the superiority of the ocean. For an hour I toiled over the microfilm study, trying to penetrate the physics of neutrinos through a mathematical language in which I recognised no familiar landmarks. At first, the undertaking seemed hopeless; there were no less than five theories of neutrino fields, a clear sign that none of them was decisive. Yet, finally, I managed to clear a rather promising piece of ground. I was copying formulas when I heard a knock. I got up quickly and went to open the door. Snaut looked up at me with his face glistening with sweat. Behind him the corridor was deserted. - Ah, it's you... - I pushed the panel aside. - I pushed aside the panel. Come in! - Yes, it's me. He spoke in a hoarse voice. Pockets hung under his bloodshot eyes. He wore a shiny rubber radiation apron, and elastic braces supported the eternally filthy trousers. His gaze swept across the evenly lit circular room and settled on Harey; she was standing at the back next to an armchair. Snaut looked back at me; I lowered my eyelids imperceptibly. He bowed, and I said in a casual tone, 'Harey, this is Dr. Snaut... Snaut, this is my wife. - His hesitation was dangerously prolonged, but he managed to finish, "That is why I did not have the pleasure of meeting you earlier. Harey smiled and held out his hand, which he shook with some amazement; he blinked several times and stood looking at it without saying anything.

I took him by the shoulder. - Excuse me," he said to Harey. I wanted to talk to you, Kelvin... With superb ease I replied: "Of course, I am at your disposal. - I was playing a sinister game, but what else could I do? - Harey, my dear, don't bother! I took Snaut by the elbow and led him to the seats on the other side of the room. Harey sat in the chair I had occupied earlier; she had turned it so that she could see us over her book. I asked quietly, "What's up? He whispered through his teeth: - I got a divorce. - If, a few days before, I had been told of such a conversation, I would have laughed; but in the Station my sense of humour was dulled. - Since last night I have lived hours that count for years," he added. Years you don't forget. What about you? After a moment, I answered: - Nothing... I didn't know what to say. I liked him, but I was suspicious of him, or rather of the reason for his visit. He repeated: "Nothing? I pretended not to understand: - What? With half-closed eyes he leaned so close to me that I felt the warmth of his breath on my face. I can't reach Sartorius anymore. I only know what I wrote to you, what he told me after our little conference... - Did he disconnect his phone? - No, there was a short circuit in his house. He clenched his fist and made the gesture of smashing an object. An unpleasant smile


He clenched his fist and made a gesture of smashing an object, an unpleasant smile tugged at the corner of his lips. I looked at him wordlessly. - Kelvin, I came to... what do you intend to do? I answered slowly: - Are you here to get my answer to your letter? I'll go for a walk, I have no reason to refuse. I was just preparing my trip... He interrupted me: - No! it's not that. I feigned surprise: "No? Then what is it? I'm listening. He mumbled: "Sartorius... thinks he's on the way..." Snaut didn't take his eyes off me. I didn't move; I tried to keep an air of indifference. - First there was that X-ray operation, which he organised with Gibarian, you remember. It may have caused some modification... - What modification? - They sent a beam of radiation directly into the ocean, only modulating the intensity according to a program. - I know. Niline had already done it, and many others. - Yes, but the others had administered a weak radiation. This time it was a strong radiation. They sent all the energy they could muster into the ocean. - That could have unpleasant consequences... violation of the Four Party Agreement and the UN... - Kelvin! You know that doesn't matter now. Gibarian is dead. - Ah, is Sartorius going to pin it on him? - I don't know. I don't know. We haven't talked about it. It doesn't matter. Sartorius is struck by the fact that the "visitors" always arrive when you wake up. He deduces that the ocean is mainly interested in our sleep and gets its production revenue from us while we are sleeping. Now Sartorius would like to send him our 'waking state' - our waking thoughts - you understand? - By post?

- Keep your jokes to yourself! A beam of rays will be modulated by the brain currents of one of us. I was beginning to see clearly: - Ah, and one of us is me? - Yes, Sartorius thought of you. - You can thank him for me. - What did you say? I was silent. Snaut glanced at Harey, who was reading absorbedly, then back at me. I felt myself turning pale. - So?" he repeated. I shrugged my shoulders: "The idea of transmitting these sermons on the greatness of man by X-ray seems to me absolutely ridiculous. And to you too, doesn't it? - Yes," he said. - Very well," he said, smiling as if I had agreed to his wish, "so you're against this Sartorius project? I didn't know how it happened, but I could tell from his expression that he had led me by the nose. - Very well," he continued. There's a second project: building a Roche device. - An annihilator? - Yes. Sartorius has already begun the preliminary calculations. It is serious. And it doesn't even require a great expenditure of energy. The device will produce magnetic anti-fields twenty-four hours a day, for an indefinite time. - How do you picture this? - It is very simple. These are neutrino anti-fields. Ordinary matter will remain unchanged. Only the... neutrino structures will be annihilated. Do you understand? Satisfied, he smiled. I stood still, my mouth half open. He stopped smiling. His forehead wrinkled, he considered me carefully and waited a moment before speaking:


- Well, we're abandoning the first project, the "Thought" project? As for the second project, Sartorius is actively working on it. Let's call it 'Liberation'! I closed my eyes for a moment. Suddenly I made up my mind. Snaut was not a physicist. Sartorius had disconnected or destroyed his phone. Perfect! Then I replied: "I'd call this second project 'Operation Slaughterhouse'. - You've already practised as a killer. Don't tell me you haven't! This time it's something completely different. No more 'visitors', no more F-creations - nothing! Disintegration follows instantly after materialisation. I nodded, with a smile that I hoped to make as natural as possible: - There is a misunderstanding. I am not talking to you about moral scruples, but about self-preservation. My dear Snaut, I don't want to die. - What? He looked at me suspiciously. I pulled a sheet of paper from my pocket, covered with formulas: - I too have considered this 'experiment'. It was me who put forward the neutrino hypothesis, wasn't it? Look at this! We can create anti-fields. Indeed, it is harmless to ordinary matter. But at the moment of destabilisation, when the neutrino structure decays, we release the energy that holds the structure together - a considerable surplus of energy is released. If we assume 108 ergs for one kilogram of substance at rest, we will get 57 multiplied by 108 for a creation F. Do you know what that means?... the equivalent of a small charge of uranium exploding inside the Station. - What are you talking about? But... Sartorius must have considered all this... I smiled wickedly: - Not necessarily! You see, Sartorius belongs to the school of Frazer and Cajolla. According to their theories, at the moment of disintegration, all the latent energy is released in the form of a

radiation - a powerful light, perhaps not harmless, but not destructive. However, there are other hypotheses, other theories about neutrino fields. According to Cayatte, according to Awalow, according to Sion, the range of the emission is considerably wider; at its maximum, the release of energy becomes a powerful gamma-ray emission. Sartorius trusts his masters and their theories, that's very nice, but there are other masters and other theories. And do you know, Snaut - I continued, seeing that my words had impressed him - we must also take into account this ocean! To make his creations, he must have followed an optimal method. In other words, the processes of the ocean seem to me to be an argument in favour of the other school, and against Sartorius. - Give me that paper, Kelvin... I gave him the sheet. I gave him the paper and he bowed his head and tried to decipher my scribbles. With the tip of his finger he underlined something: - What's that? I took the paper back: - This? the magnetic field transmutation tensor. - Give me... - Why? I knew what he was going to say. - I have to show these calculations to Sartorius. - As you wish... - I had taken an indifferent tone. - I can give you this sheet, of course. Only, you see, no one has yet verified these theories by experiment; we didn't know about such structures yet. He trusts Frazer, and I followed Zion's theory. Sartorius will tell you that I am not a physicist, that Sion is not either. Or at least not from his point of view. He will argue. I don't want a discussion, which would lead me to recant, for the greater glory of Sartorius. I can convince you. I am not strong enough to convince Sartorius and I won't try. - So what do you want to do? He set to work...

Snaut spoke in a timeless voice. He had stooped; all his animation had subsided. I didn't know if he trusted me, but I didn't really care. I answered quietly: "What do I want to do? What a man who is being tried to kill does. - I will try to communicate with him. He may have planned precautions..." Snaut grunted, then straightened his head: "Listen, what if... what about the first project? Would you accept? Sartorius would agree. I'm sure he would. It's... at least, it's a chance to take. - Do you believe it? - No," he answered immediately. But what are we risking? I didn't want to accept too quickly. I wanted to gain time and Snaut could help me extend the deadline. - I'll think about it. - Well, I'm off," Snaut grunted. - When he stood up, every bone in his body cracked. - We'll have to start with an encephalogram," he said, rubbing his apron as if he were trying to erase an invisible stain. - Good. Without taking leave of Harey, he walked to the door. With the book in his lap, Harey watched him leave. When the door closed, I stood up. I smoothed out the sheet of paper in my hand. The formulas were correct. I had not falsified them. But would Zion have approved of my developments? Probably not. I shuddered; Harey had come up and touched my shoulder. - Kris! - What, dear? - Who was that? - Doctor Snaut, I told you. - What kind of man? - I don't know him well... why? - He looked at me in such a strange way... He liked you.

She shook her head: - No, he looked at me in a different way... as if... She shivered, looked up at me and then looked down: - Let's get out of here...