In the middle of the night I was woken by a light. I propped myself
up on my elbow, covering my eyes with my other hand. Harey was
wrapped in the bedsheet; she was sitting at the foot of the bed,
hunched over, her hair falling across her face. Her shoulders were
shaking. She was crying soundlessly.
     “Harey!”
     She curled up even more.
     “What’s wrong? Harey. . .”
     I sat up on the bed, still not entirely awake, slowly disengaging
from the nightmare that had been stifling me a moment ago. The girl
was trembling. I put my arms around her. She pushed me away with
her elbow and hid her face.
     “Darling.”
     “Don’t say that.”
     “Harey, for goodness’ sake, what is it?”
     I saw her quivering, tear-stained face. Big childlike teardrops were
rolling down her cheeks; they glistened in the dimple on her chin and
fell onto the sheet.
     “You don’t want me.”
     “Where did you get that idea!”
     “I heard.”
     I could feel my whole face stiffening.
     “What did you hear? You misunderstood, it was only. . .”
    “No. No. You were saying it isn’t me. That I should go away. I
would, God I would, but I can’t. I don’t know what it is. I wanted to
and I can’t. I’m so, I’m so bad!”
    “Come on, kid!”
    I snatched her up, pulled her to myself as hard as I could, every-
thing was falling apart. I kissed her hands, her wet salty fingers, I
repeated entreaties, oaths, I apologized, I said it was a stupid nasty
dream. She gradually calmed down. She stopped crying. Her eyes
were huge, somnambulistic. They dried. She turned her head away.
    “No,” she said, “don’t say all that, there’s no need. You’re not the
same towards me either. . .”
    “I’m not!”
    It came out like a groan.
    “That’s right. You don’t want me. I felt it the whole time. I
pretended not to see it. I thought I was maybe just imagining it or
something. But no. You’re behaving. . . differently. You don’t take me
seriously. It was a dream, that’s true, but you were dreaming me. You
called me by my name. You were disgusted. Why? Why?!”
    I knelt in front of her and put my arms around her knees.
    “Come on now, kid.”
    “I don’t want you to talk like that. I don’t want it, you hear? I’m
not a kid. I’m. . .”
    She burst out sobbing and fell face down on the bed. I stood up.
Cool air blew from the air vents with a faint rustle. I was cold. I
threw on a bath robe, sat on the bed and touched her shoulder.
    “Harey, listen to me. I want to tell you something. I want to tell
you the truth. . .”
    She sat up, gently leaning her weight on her hands. I could see
the pulse beating beneath the thin skin on her neck. My face went
numb again and I felt as cold as if I’d been standing on ice. My head
was completely empty.
    “The truth?” she said. “Cross your heart?”
    I didn’t answer right away. I had to overcome a constriction in my
throat. That was our old phrase. When it was uttered, neither of us
dared lie, nor even remain silent on whatever it was about. There was
a time we tormented one another with excessive honesty in the naive
belief it would save us.
     “Cross my heart,” I said solemnly. “Harey. . .”
     She waited.
     “You’ve changed too. We all change. But that wasn’t what I
wanted to say. It really looks as if. . . for a reason neither of us fully
understands. . . you’re not able to be apart from me. But that’s not
such a bad thing, because with you too, I’m not able to. . .”
     “Kris!”
     I picked her up, wrapped in the sheet. A corner of it, wet with
tears, fell on my shoulder. I walked around the cabin, rocking her.
She stroked my face.
     “No. You haven’t changed. It’s me,” she whispered in my ear.
“There’s something wrong with me. Maybe that?”
     She was staring at the dark empty rectangle where the broken
door had been; I’d taken what was left of it to the depository the
previous evening. I’ll need to put a new one up, I thought to myself.
I laid her on the bed.
     “Do you even sleep at all?” I asked, standing over her with my
arms dangling.
     “I don’t know.”
     “What do you mean, you don’t know? Think about it, darling.”
     “I don’t think it’s real sleep. Maybe I’m sick. I lie here and think,
and you know. . .”
     She shuddered.
     “What is it?” I asked in a whisper, knowing my voice might fail
me.
     “They’re really strange thoughts. I don’t know where they come
from.”
     “Like what for example?”
     I have to stay calm, I thought to myself, whatever I hear, and I
steeled myself for her words as if for a powerful blow.
     She shook her head, at a loss.
     “It’s just kind of. . . all around. . .”
     “I don’t follow. . . ?”
    “As if it weren’t just inside me, but further away, kind of, I can’t
explain. There aren’t words to express it. . .”
    “It’s probably dreams,” I said in an offhand way, and breathed
a sigh of relief. “Now let’s turn off the light and not worry about
anything till morning, and if we feel like it, in the morning we’ll look
for some new worries, OK?”
    She reached out for the switch and darkness fell. I lay down on
the cold bedding and felt the warmth of her breath drawing closer.
    I put my arm around her.
    “Tighter,” she whispered. Then after a long while: “Kris!”
    “What?”
    “I love you.”
    I felt like screaming.
    The dawn was red. The huge disk of the sun hung low over
the horizon. There was a letter on the threshold. I tore open the
envelope. Harey was in the bathroom; I could hear her humming to
herself. From time to time she popped her head around the door, her
hair all wet. I went up to the window and read:

      Kelvin, we’re gotten bogged down. Sartorius is arguing for
      vigorous steps. He believes he’ll be able to destabilize the
      neutrino systems. For his experiments he needs a certain
      amount of plasma as initial G-matter. He’s proposing that
      you go on a reconnaissance and gather some plasma in a
      container. Do whatever you think right, but let us know
      your decision. I have no opinion either way. I don’t think
      I have anything at all anymore. I’d prefer you to do it, but
      only so we can move forward, or at least look as if we are.
      Otherwise there’s nothing left but to envy G.
      Rat
      PS Don’t come to the radio station. That you can still do for
      me. Best of all is to telephone.

    My heart sank as I read the letter. I looked it over carefully one
more time, tore it up and threw the scraps into the sink. Then I
started looking for a space suit for Harey. That alone was awful.
It was exactly like the last time. But she knew nothing about it,
otherwise she wouldn’t have been so pleased when I told her I had to
go on a short reconnaissance outside the Station and I’d like her to
come along. We ate breakfast in the small galley (during which Harey
barely swallowed a few mouthfuls) and went to the library.
    I wanted to look over the literature on field problems and neutrino
systems before I did what Sartorius wanted. I didn’t know how I was
going to go about it, but I’d decided to keep an eye on what he was
doing. It had occurred to me that this as-yet nonexistent neutrino
annihilator could liberate Snaut and Sartorius, while I waited out the
operation with Harey somewhere on the outside—in an aircraft for
example. For some time I pored over the electronic catalogue, asking
it questions to which it responded either by spitting out a slip of paper
that read laconically “not in bibliography,” or inviting me into such a
jungle of specialized research in physics that I didn’t know where to
begin. For some reason I had an urge to remain in that large circular
room with its smooth walls covered in a checkerwork of drawers with
their multitudes of microfilms and electronic records. The library was
located in the very center of the Station; as such it had no windows
and was the most isolated place inside the steel shell. Who knows if
that wasn’t the reason I felt so good there, despite the absolute failure
of my search. I wandered about the large space till finally I came to a
stop in front of a huge bookcase, reaching up to the ceiling and filled
with books. It wasn’t so much an indulgence, and a very dubious
one at that, as a respectful memorial to the pioneers of solaristic
exploration: the shelves, on which there were perhaps six hundred
volumes, contained all the classics of the discipline, starting with
Giese’s already mostly outdated nine-volume monograph. I took out
the tomes, so heavy they made my hand droop, and flipped through
them idly as I perched on the arm of a chair. Harey also found
herself a book—I read a few lines of it over her shoulder. It was
one of the few books that had belonged to the first expedition, and
had probably been owned by Giese himself—The Interplanetary Chef.
I didn’t say anything, seeing the attentiveness with which Harey was
studying recipes adapted for the austere conditions of space travel,
and I returned to the venerable volume I had on my lap. Ten Years of
Research on Solaris had appeared in the “Solariana” series as numbers
four through thirteen, while the most recent additions to the series
were in the four digits.
     Giese had not been especially inspired, but such a quality can only
hinder a scholar of Solaris—it may well be that imagination and the
ability to formulate rapid hypotheses is nowhere more harmful. After
all, on that planet anything is possible. Far-fetched descriptions of
configurations formed by the plasma are in all likelihood true, though
usually unconfirmable, since the ocean rarely repeats its evolutions.
Those observing them for the first time are staggered above all by
their outlandishness and their vast scope. If they’d taken place on
a small scale, in some swamp, they’d probably be written off as a
freak of nature, a manifestation of randomness and the blind play
of forces. The fact that geniuses and mediocre minds are equally at
a loss when faced with the inexhaustible variety of forms of Solaris
is an additional hindrance in dealing with the marvels of the living
ocean. Giese, though, was neither the one nor the other. He was sim-
ply a pedantic classifier, one of those whose outer calm concealed an
unflagging passion that consumed his whole life. As long as he was
able, here lied exclusively on the language of description; when words
failed him he managed by creating new words, often infelicitous ones
that did not match the phenomena they were intended to describe.
When all’s said and done, though, no terms can convey what goes on
on Solaris. Its “dendromountains,” its “extensors,” “megamushrooms,”
“mimoids,” “symmetriads’ and “asymmetriads,” its “vertebrids” and
“rapidos” sound terribly artificial, but they do give some idea of Solaris
even to those who’ve seen nothing but a few blurry photographs and
poor quality films. Of course, even this conscientious classifier was
guilty of rash moments. Humans are constantly coming up with hy-
potheses, even when they’re being cautious, and even though they’re
quite unaware of it. Giese believed that extensors constituted a root
form, and he compared them to greatly magnified and heightened
versions of tidal waves in terrestrial oceans. Besides, anyone who’s
immersed himself in the first edition of the work knows that he orig-
inally named them precisely “tides” led by a geocentrism that would
be amusing if it weren’t for his helplessness. For—if comparisons with
Earth really do have to be employed—these are formations larger in
magnitude than Colorado’s Grand Canyon, modeled in a substance
that on the outside has the consistency of jelly and foam (though the
foam hardens into vast, brittle garlands, into tracery with immense
holes, while some scientists have seen it as “skeletal excrescences”).
Within, it turns into an ever firmer substance, like a flexed muscle, but
one that quickly, at a depth of fifty feet or so, grows harder than rock,
though it retains its elasticity. Extending for several miles between
walls that stretch like membranes over the monster’s back and cling
to its huge “skeleton” is the actual extensor, a seemingly independent
formation, like a colossal python that has swallowed an entire moun-
tain chain and is now digesting it in silence, from time to time setting
its body in slow, shuddering, fishlike contractions. But this is only
what the extensor looks like from above, from the cabin of an aircraft.
When you get close enough to it that the walls of the ravine rise
hundreds of yards above the plane, the python’s torso turns out to be
a moving expanse that stretches all the way to the horizon and is so
dizzying it takes on the look of a passively bulging cylinder. The first
impression is of a whirl of slick gray-green slime whose layers throw
off powerful glints of sunlight; but when the craft hovers right over
the surface (at such moments the edges of the ravine in which the
extensor is concealed are like heights on either side of a geological
depression), it can be seen that the motions are much more complex.
They possess their own concentric rotations, darker streams intersect,
and at times the outer mantle becomes a mirrored surface reflecting
clouds and sky and shot through with loud explosive eruptions of its
half-fluid, half-gaseous center. It slowly becomes clear that right be-
low you is the central point of the forces holding up the parted sides
that soar high into the sky and are composed of sluggishly crystalizing
jelly; but what is evident to the eye is not so readily accepted by sci-
ence. For years and years there were furious discussions about what
was actually happening within an extensor, millions of which litter the
vastnesses of the living ocean. It was thought they were some sort
of organs of the monster, in which it metabolizes matter or which
contain processes of breathing, the transfer of nutrition, and other
things now known only to dusty library shelves. Every hypothesis was
eventually disproved by a thousand painstaking and often perilous
experiments. And all this concerned only the extensors, when it came
down to it the simplest and most enduring form, for their existence
lasts several weeks—something quite exceptional here.
    One highly complex, capricious form that stirs the fiercest resis-
tance in the viewer—a resistance that is, of course, instinctive—is the
mimoids. It can be said without exaggeration that Giese fell in love
with them, and to the very end he devoted himself to exploring them,
describing them, and puzzling out their essence. With the name he
strove to convey what for humans is most curious about them: a
tendency to imitate the forms around them, whether close or remote.
    On a certain day, deep below the surface of the ocean there ap-
pears the darkening shape of a broad flat circle that has ragged sides
and is as if coated with tar. After twelve or fifteen hours it becomes
layered, is more and more visibly segmented, and at the same time
thrusts upwards toward the surface. The observer could swear that
beneath him a violent struggle is taking place, because endless series
of synchronous circular waves flow in from all around like shrinking
mouths, like living, muscled, closing craters; they pile up on top of
the swaying blackish phantom lying in the depths and, first rising ver-
tically, they plummet downwards. Each such plunge of hundreds of
thousands of tons is accompanied by a sticky, almost smacking rum-
ble that goes on for several seconds, because here everything happens
on a monstrous scale. The dark formation is forced downwards; each
successive impact seems to flatten and spread it. From individual lay-
ers, which droop like wet wings, elongated clusters break loose; they
narrow into long necklaces, fuse together and drift upwards, drawing
with them the fragmented mother disk, which has as it were adhered
to them; in the meantime successive rings of waves are continuing
incessantly to descend from above into a huge and ever more dis-
tinctly concave circle. This game can go on for a day, or it can last
a whole month. Sometimes that’s the end of it. The conscientious
Giese labeled such a variant an “abortive mimoid” as though, from
who-knew-where, he possessed the certain knowledge that the ulti-
mate goal of every such upheaval was a “mature mimoid,” that is
to say, the colony of polyp-like, light-skinned excrescences (usually
larger than a terrestrial city) whose destiny is to copy external forms.
. . It goes without saying that another solaricist came along, by the
name of Uyvens, who on the contrary determined that this last phase
was a “degenerative” one, a degradation, an atrophy, and that the for-
est of created shapes was an evident manifestation of the branching
formations freeing themselves from the control of the matrix.
     Giese, however—who in all his descriptions of other formations
on Solaris proceeded like an ant climbing a frozen waterfall, allowing
nothing to distract him from the regular tread of his dry language—
was in this case so sure of being right that he classified the successive
phases of the mimoid’s emergence in a sequence of increasing per-
fection.
     Seen from high up, a mimoid looks like a city; but this is an
illusion arising from the need for any sort of analogy with something
familiar. When the sky is clear, all the multistory growths and their
crowning palisades are surrounded by a layer of heated air that makes
the shapes, already hard to determine, look as if they were swaying
and bending. The first cloud crossing the blue (I use this expression
out of habit, because this “blue” is ruddy during the red day and
terrifyingly white during the blue one) brings an immediate response.
An abrupt gemmation begins: a malleable skin, almost completely
separate from the base and swelling out like a cauliflower, is projected
upwards; simultaneously it grows pale, and in a few minutes it offers
a perfect imitation of the puffy cloud. This huge object casts a reddish
shadow. Some of the mimoid’s peaks seem to pass it on to others;
this movement always takes place in the opposite direction to the
movement of the real cloud. I think Giese would have given his right
arm to know at the very least why this happens. But such “isolated”
creations of the mimoid are nothing in comparison with the elemental
activity it displays when it is “stimulated” by the presence of objects
and shapes appearing above it due to the actions of terrestrial visitors.
     The re-creation of forms essentially includes anything to be found
within a radius of up to eight or nine miles. More often than not the
mimoid produces magnified copies; at times it distorts them, creating
caricatures or grotesque simplifications, especially of machines. It
goes without saying that the material is always the same, a rapidly
decoloring mass that, when flung into the air, instead of falling hangs
there, joined by easily broken umbilical cords to the base, across which
it crawls, at the same time contracting, narrowing or expanding as it
fluidly assumes the most complex patterns. Aircraft, grate, or mast
are reproduced with equal rapidity; the mimoid fails to respond only
to people, or to be precise, to any living beings, including plants,
because these too were brought to Solaris for research purposes by
indefatigable scientists. Whereas a mannequin, a human doll, a figure
of a dog or tree made in any material whatsoever is instantly imitated.
     And here, unfortunately, it needs to be said in parentheses that
this “obedience” on the part of the mimoid toward the scientists,
so unusual on Solaris, is sometimes suspended. The most mature
mimoid has its “lazy days” during which it does nothing but pulsate
very slowly. This pulsation, incidentally, is not visible to the eye; its
rhythm, a single beat of the pulse, happens once every two hours,
and stop motion photography was needed to discover it.
     In such circumstances a mimoid, especially an old one, is perfect
for visiting, since both the base disk, fixed deep in the ocean, and the
formations rising from it offer entirely firm support for the feet.
     Of course, it’s also possible to be inside a mimoid on its “busy”
days, but at such moments visibility is close to zero because of the in-
cessant precipitation of flaky colloidal suspension, the off-white color
of powdery snow, which constantly falls from the swollen branches
of the abdomen as it manufactures its imitated forms. In fact these
forms cannot be perceived from close up, due to their mountainous
immensity. In addition, the base of a “working” mimoid grows slimy
from the dense rain, which only hours later hardens into a solid shell
many times lighter than pumice. In the final stages, without the right
equipment it’s easy to get lost in the labyrinth of bulging stalks that
look a little like retractable columns, a little like semi-liquid geysers,
even in full sunlight, since the sun’s rays cannot penetrate the cover
of “imitative explosions” being thrown up into the atmosphere.
     Observing a mimoid on its happy days (which are, to be precise,
the happy days of the scientist who finds himself close by) can be
an unforgettable experience. They have their “creative frenzy” when
they commence an extraordinary hyper-production. At these times
they make either their own variations on external forms, more com-
plex versions of them, or even “formal extensions,” and they can
entertain themselves in this way for hours, to the delight of the ab-
stract artist and the despair of the researcher, who strives in vain to
comprehend any of the emerging processes. At times the mimoid’s
activity includes utterly childlike simplifications; sometimes it engages
in “baroque deviations,” at which moments all it creates is marked by
bulging elephantiasis. Old mimoids in particular fabricate shapes that
can induce a hearty chuckle. True, I myself have never been able to
laugh at them, having always been overly awed by the mystery of the
spectacle.
     It goes without saying that in the early years the scientists literally
pounced on mimoids as supposedly perfect centers of the Solarian
ocean, as places where the longed-for contact between two civiliza-
tions would take place. Yet it transpired only too quickly that such
contact was out of the question, since everything began and ended
with an imitation of shapes leading nowhere.
     The anthropomorphism and zoomorphism constantly present in
the scientists’ desperate quests saw the ever newer productions of the
living ocean as “sense organs” or even “limbs,” which for some time
scholars such as Maartens or Ekkonai perceived in Giese’s vertebrids
and rapidos. Yet these protuberances of the living ocean, sometimes
soaring two miles into the atmosphere, are no more its limbs than an
earthquake is gymnastic exercise for the earth’s crust.
     The list of forms that occur relatively regularly, and are produced
by the ocean sufficiently often that several dozen or even several hun-
dred can be found on its surface in the course of an average day, runs
to three hundred or so items. The most un-human, meaning those
that bear absolutely no resemblance to anything experienced by hu-
mankind on Earth, are according to the Giese school the symmetriads.
Even back then it was well established that the ocean did not behave
aggressively, and one could perish in its plasmic depths only by truly
striving to do so through one’s own imprudence or carelessness (nat-
urally I don’t include accidents caused by malfunctioning equipment
such as a damaged oxygen tank or cooling apparatus); and that even
the cylindrical rivers of extensors and the monstrous pillars of verte-
brids could be flown through in a airplane or other flying machine
without the slightest danger. The plasma allowed free passage, part-
ing before the foreign body at the equivalent of the speed of sound
in the atmosphere of Solaris, and when forced to, even creating deep
tunnels far beneath the surface of the ocean. (The energy it mobilized
at such moments was massive—Skriabin calculated that in extreme
cases it could amount to 109 ergs!) Symmetriads were investigated
with exceptional caution, constantly drawing back, adopting multiple
safety measures (though, truth be told, these were often bogus); the
names of those who first explored them are known to every child on
Earth.
     The direness of these giants doesn’t lie in their appearance, though
that can truly induce nightmares. It rather arises from the fact that
within them nothing is stable or certain; even the laws of physics
are suspended. It was always those studying symmetriads who pro-
claimed most vociferously the thesis that the living ocean was rational.
     Symmetriads arise without warning. Their beginning is a kind of
eruption. About an hour beforehand, the ocean begins to gleam, as if
it’s been covered with glass over an area of tens of square miles. Other
than this, its fluidity and the rhythm of its waves remain unchanged.
At times a symmetriad emerges where there is a funnel from an
absorbed rapido, but this is not a rule. After an hour or so, the glassy
coating rises upwards in a monstrous bubble that reflects the entire
sky, sun and clouds and the whole horizon, shimmering and glinting.
The lightning play of colors, caused partly by the curvature and partly
by refraction of the light, has no parallel.
     Particularly striking effects of light are produced by symmetriads
that arise during the blue day and immediately before sunset. At
such times it looks as if the planet is giving birth to another one,
doubling its volume with every moment. The moment the globe with
its flaming shimmer bursts from the depths, it splits at its highest
point into vertical sectors, but it isn’t disintegrating. This stage, rather
clumsily labeled the “calycate phase,” lasts only seconds. The arches
of membranous spans rising into the sky become inverted, link up
in the unseen interior and instantly begin to form something along
the lines of a squat torso within which hundreds of things happen at
once. In the very center, which was first studied by the seventy-person
Hamalei expedition, a process of gigantocrystalization and polycrystal-
ization leads to the emergence of an axial supporting pivot sometimes
called a “spine,” though I am not a fan of the term. The precipitous
architecture of this central pillar is held up in statu nascendi—as it
is being born—by vertical columns of a jelly so diluted it’s almost
watery, bursting endlessly from the mile-deep recesses. During this
process the colossus emits a prolonged hollow roar, and is encircled
by a shaft of snowy, coarse-celled foam that quakes furiously. There
then follow, moving from the center to the periphery, extraordinarily
complex revolutions of the hardened planes on which the layers of
ductile matter rising from below have accumulated, while at the same
time the deep-ocean geysers mentioned above condense and trans-
form into mobile tentacle-like columns; clusters of them reach toward
loci of construction that are strictly determined by the dynamics of
the whole, recalling some sort of immense gills of an embryo grow-
ing a thousand times faster than normal, and streaming with pinkish
blood and a green water so dark it’s almost black. From this moment
the symmetriad begins to manifest its most extraordinary quality: the
modeling or even suspension of laws of physics. Let us begin by say-
ing that no two symmetriads are alike and that the geometry of each
is, as it were, an “invention” of the living ocean. So then, the sym-
metriad produces in its interior things that are often called “instant
machines,” though these formations bear no resemblance to machines
constructed by people—the term only refers to a certain “mechanical”
purposiveness of operation.
     When the geysers erupting far beneath the ocean surface solidify
or swell into thick-walled galleries and corridors that run in every
direction, and the “membranes” form a system of intersecting planes,
overhangs, and ceilings, the symmetriad justifies its name by the fact
that each intricate arrangement of passages, pathways, and inclines
within one of its poles has a faithful copy at the other.
     After twenty or thirty minutes the giant slowly begins to sink,
occasionally first leaning between eight and twelve degrees in the
vertical axis. There are larger and smaller symmetriads, but even the
dwarves rise a good two and a half thousand feet over the horizon
after they begin to submerge, and can be seen from miles away. It’s
safest to enter their interior immediately after they reach stability,
since the whole ceases to drop into the ocean, and at the same
time it returns to the perfectly perpendicular. The best point of
entry is the area just below the summit. In this place the relatively
smooth polar “cap” is encircled by an area honeycombed with funnel-
shaped openings to inner chambers and channels. This configuration
constitutes, as a whole, a three-dimensional solution to a higher-order
equation.
    It’s common knowledge that any equation can be expressed in the
figural language of higher geometry, and a solid can be constructed
that is its equivalent. In this understanding, a symmetriad is a relative
of Lobachevsky’s cones and Riemann’s negative curvatures, but a very
distant relative, due to its unimaginable complexity. Occupying an
area of several cubic miles, it constitutes the solution to an entire
mathematical system; this solution, furthermore, is four-dimensional,
since certain essential coefficients in the equation are also expressed
in time, that is to say, in the changes brought about by its passing.
    Naturally, the simplest conception was that this was no more and
no less than a “mathematical machine” of the living ocean, a model
created on its own scale for calculations it needed for some unknown
purpose; but this idea, the Fermont Hypothesis, is no longer credited.
It was tempting, to be sure; but the claim that these titanic eruptions,
every tiny particle of which was constantly subject to the complicating
formulas of the overall analysis, were being used by the living ocean
to examine questions of matter, space, existence—this notion proved
untenable. Too many phenomena were to be found in the giant’s
innards that could not be reconciled with such a simple (some said
childishly naive) depiction.
    There was no lack of attempts to come up with an intelligible
model of a symmetriad, a visualization of it. One popular explanation
was offered by Averian, who presented the matter as follows. Imagine
an ancient terrestrial building from Babylonian times. Let it be built
out of a living, responsive, evolving substance. Its design proceeds
fluidly through a series of phases, taking on, as we watch, the forms
of Greek and Roman architecture. Then the columns begin to grow
narrow as stalks, the ceiling loses its weight; it rises, sharpens, the
arches turn into steep parabolas and eventually fold and soar. The
Gothic that has appeared in this way begins to mature and age; it
dissolves into late forms, its former precipitous severity replaced with
eruptions of orgiastic exuberance. Before our eyes Baroque excess
proliferates; and if we continue this sequence – all the time regarding
our changing formation as if it were the successive stages of a living
being – we’ll finally arrive at the architecture of the space center era,
at the same time perhaps getting closer to understanding the nature
of the symmetriad.
    Yet this analogy, however it may be expanded and enriched (in
fact, there were efforts to show it visually using special models and
films), remains at best weak, at worst an evasion, if not a downright
falsehood, for a symmetriad is unlike anything on Earth. . .
    A human being is capable of taking in very few things at one
time; we see only what is happening in front of us, here and now. Vi-
sualizing a simultaneous multiplicity of processes, however they may
be interconnected, however they may complement one another, is be-
yond us. We experience this even with relatively simple phenomena.
The fate of a single person can mean many things, the fate of several
hundred is hard to encompass; but the history of thousands, millions,
means essentially nothing at all. A symmetriad is millions, no, bil-
lions, to the nth power; it is unimaginability itself. What of it if, in
the recesses of one of its aisles that is a ten-fold version of a Kro-
necker space, we stand like ants holding onto the folds of a breathing
vault, that we watch the rise of vast planes grayly opalescent in the
light of our flares, their interpenetration, the softness and infallible
perfection of their resolution, which only lasts a moment, for every-
thing here is fluid—the content of this architecture is motion, intent
and purposive. We observe a fragment of the process, the trembling
of a single string in a symphonic orchestra of supergiants, and on
top of that we know—we only know, without comprehending—that
at the same time, above us and beneath us, in the plunging deep,
beyond the limits of sight and imagination there are multiple, million
fold simultaneous transformations connected to one another like the
notes of musical counterpoint. For this reason someone gave them
the name of geometric symphony, but if this is the case, we are its
unhearing audience.
     Here, in order to truly see anything at all, one would have to draw
back rapidly, retreat to an immense distance; yet in a symmetriad all
is internal, all is propagation, surging avalanches of births, endless
shaping. At the same time each shaped thing is itself in the business
of shaping other things, and no mimosa is as sensitive to a single
touch, to the changes taking place where we stand, as the distant
other pole of the symmetriad, miles away and separated by hundreds
of stories. Here every momentary structure, with a beauty that attains
its fulfillment beyond the limits of sight, is a co-creator and conductor
of all the others that occur at the same time, and they in turn have
a modeling influence on it. A symphony—very well, but a kind that
writes itself and drowns itself out. Terrible is the end of the sym-
metriad. No one who sees it can resist the impression of witnessing
a tragedy, if not a murder. After two, at the most three hours—this
explosive growth, multiplication of itself, self-reproduction, never lasts
longer—the living ocean goes on the offensive. It looks as follows:
the smooth surface wrinkles over; the surf, calm now and covered
with dried foam, starts to seethe; concentric series of waves rush in
from the horizons. They form the same kind of muscle-bound craters
as those that assist at the birth of a mimoid, though these ones are
incomparably huger. The submerged part of the symmetriad is com-
pressed and the colossus rises slowly upwards as if it were about to
be flung from the planet; the upper layers of the ocean’s glial matter
move into action, they creep higher and higher up the symmetriad’s
side walls, covering them over, hardening, blocking up the passage-
ways. But all this is nothing in comparison with what’s taking place
at the same time within. To begin with, the formative processes—the
making of successive architectures—pause for a brief moment, then
suddenly accelerate; movements that up till now have been fluid, in-
terpenetrations, foldings, the addition of foundations and ceilings, all
of which has proceeded thus far smoothly and as surely as if it were to
endure for centuries, begins to rush. There’s an overwhelming sense
that faced with imminent danger, the colossus is hurriedly moving
towards some kind of consummation. Yet the greater the speed of the
transformations, the more glaring the terrible, horrific metamorphosis
of the material itself and its dynamics. All the soaring, magically curv-
ing planes soften, grow flaccid, droop; there begin to appear lapses,
unfinished forms, grotesque, misshapen. A gathering roar rises from
the unseen depths; air, expelled as if in death throes and rubbing
against the narrowing channels, wheezing and thundering in the pas-
sageways, stimulates the collapsing ceilings to a wail as if from lifeless
vocal cords or monstrous throats overgrown with stalactites of slime,
and despite the furious movement that has been unleashed—it is,
after all, the movement of destruction—the spectator is immediately
overcome by a sense of utter deadness. By this point the towering
construction is supported only by the gale howling from the abyss,
passing through it via a thousand shafts, inflating the structure, which
begins to slide downwards, collapse like a plaster statue caught in the
flames, though here and there the last twitchings can still be seen,
incoherent movements disconnected from the rest, blind, ever weaker,
till the huge mass, undermined and exposed to constant attack from
outside, collapses with the slowness of a mountain and vanishes in a
confusion of foam like that which accompanied its titanic appearance.
     And what does all this mean? Yes indeed, what does it mean. . .
     I remember a school tour visiting the Solaris Institute in Aden
when I was Gibarian’s assistant. After passing through a side area
of the library, the young people were led into its main room, which
is mostly filled with boxes of microfilms. They contain images of
brief moments from the interior of symmetriads which themselves, of
course, are long gone. There are over ninety thousand of them—reels,
that is, not photographs. And then a plump girl of perhaps fifteen, in
glasses, with a resolute and intelligent expression, suddenly asked:
     “What’s it all for?”
     In the awkward silence that followed, the teacher gave her trou-
blesome charge a stern look; but none of the solaricists accompanying
the group (of whom I was one) could offer an answer. Because sym-
metriads are unique, as are most of the phenomena that take place
in them. Sometimes the air ceases to conduct sound within them.
Sometimes the refraction coefficient increases or decreases. Localized
pulsing, rhythmic changes of gravitation occur, as if the symmetriad
had a beating gravitational heart. Occasionally the scientists’ gyro-
compasses would start to behave as if they’d gone mad; layers of
intensified ionization would appear then vanish. The list goes on.
Besides, if the mystery of the symmetriads is ever solved, there’ll still
be the asymmetriads. . .
    They arise in a similar way, but they have a different end and
nothing can be observed in them except for trembling, glowing, twin-
kling; we know only that they are the seat of dizzyingly rapid pro-
cesses, at the limits of physically possible velocities, also known as
“magnified quantum phenomena.” Their mathematical resemblance
to certain models of the atom is, however, so unstable and fleeting
that some consider it a side effect or even something entirely ac-
cidental. They exist a much shorter time than symmetriads—only
ten or fifteen minutes—and their end is perhaps even more terrible,
because following the hurricane that fills them to bursting with hard,
roaring air, with a hellish swiftness they become filled with a liquid
that eddies beneath a coating of dirty foam, and that floods over ev-
erything, bubbling hideously, after which there follows an explosion
like a volcano of mud erupting, tossing up a disheveled pillar of rem-
nants that for a long time afterwards descend in a macerated rain on
the unquiet surface of the ocean. Some of these pieces, carried on
the wind—dry as sticks, yellowing, flat, and for this reason resembling
membranous bones or cartilage—can be found drifting on the waves
dozens of miles from the heart of the explosion.
    A separate group comprises formations that detach themselves
completely from the living ocean for a shorter or longer time. They
are much less frequent that the previously mentioned phenomena,
and much harder to observe. The first time fragments of them were
found they were completely misidentified, it transpired much later, as
the dead bodies of beings that dwelled in the ocean. At times they
appear to be fleeing like strange multi-winged birds being pursued by
the funnels of rapidos, but this concept, borrowed from Earth, once
again becomes a wall that cannot be broken through. Sometimes,
though only very infrequently, on the rocky shores of islands one can
see groups of flightless creatures like pods of seals, basking in the sun
or lazily crawling to the sea, so as to melt into it.
     In this way everyone remained within the limitations of human,
terrestrial concepts, while first contact. . .
     Expeditions traveled hundred of miles deep inside symmetriads,
setting up recording equipment and automatic film cameras; the tele-
vision eyes of robot satellites captured the gemmation of mimoids
and extensors, their maturation and decease. Libraries filled, archives
grew; the cost was sometimes high. Seven hundred and eighteen
people died in various disasters, having failed to withdraw in time
from colossuses whose time had come. Of these, one hundred and
six perished in a single catastrophe that was infamous because their
number included Giese himself, by that time an old man of seventy,
when a formation that was a clear example of a symmetriad suddenly
met the end that usually befalls an asymmetriad. Seventy-nine of the
victims, wearing armored space suits, along with their apparatus and
machinery, were swallowed up in a matter of seconds by an explosion
of muddy slime whose offshoots struck down twenty-seven others pi-
loting aircraft and helicopters above the formation being investigated.
This place, at the intersection of the forty-second parallel and the
eighty-ninth meridian, is marked on maps as the Eruption of the One
Hundred and Six. But the point exists on maps alone, since in that
place the surface of the ocean is no different than any of its other
regions.
     At that moment, for the first time in the history of research on
Solaris, voices were heard calling for the use of thermonuclear strikes.
It was to be in essence crueler than revenge: it would have meant
the destruction of that which we cannot comprehend. Tsanken, the
second-in-command of Giese’s relief team, who survived only thanks
to an error—the relay automat had incorrectly indicated the place
where the others were studying the symmetriad, such that Tsanken
traipsed about all over the ocean and only came to the right place
literally minutes after the explosion, seeing the black mushroom cloud
as he approached—at the moment when the decision to attack was
being weighed, threatened he would blow up the Station along with
himself and the other eighteen crew members remaining on it, and
though it was never admitted that this suicidal ultimatum influenced
the vote, it can be assumed such was the case.
     But the times of such large expeditions visiting the planet are
past. The Station itself—its construction, supervised from satellites,
was an engineering venture on a scale Earth could have been proud
of, were it not for the fact that the ocean produced out of itself
structures a million times larger in the space of seconds—was built
in the form of a disk with a diameter of six hundred and fifty feet,
with four stories in the center and two around the edges. Suspended
between fifteen hundred and five thousand feet above the ocean –
thanks to gravitors driven by annihilation energy, along with all the
equipment usually found on Stations and large Satelloids of other
planets – it was additionally provided with special radar sensors that
at the first change in the ocean’s smooth surface would initiate extra
power, bringing the steel disk up into the stratosphere the moment a
new living formation showed signs of being born.
     Now the Station was virtually deserted. Since the automats had
been locked away in the cavernous depositories —for reasons still un-
known to me—one could wander the corridors without meeting any-
one, like in a drifting wreck whose motors have survived the demise
of its crew.
     As I was setting the ninth volume of Giese’s monograph back on
the shelf I had the impression that the steel floor under its covering of
thick foam plastic suddenly trembled beneath my feet. I froze, but the
trembling didn’t recur. The library was thoroughly insulated from the
rest of the structure, and tremors could be caused by one thing only.
A rocket had been launched from the Station. This thought brought
me back to reality. I still hadn’t fully made up my mind whether to
go on the reconnaissance as Sartorius wanted. By acting as though I
concurred with his plans in full, I could do no more than postpone
the crisis; I was almost certain there’d be conflict, because I’d decided
to do whatever I could to save Harey. The big question was whether
there was a chance Sartorius might succeed. He had a huge advantage
over me—as a physicist he knew the problem ten times better than
I did, while I, paradoxically, could count only on the excellence of
the solutions the ocean deigned to offer us. For the next hour I
pored over microfilms, striving to extract any sense whatsoever from
the sea of hellish mathematics that was the language spoken by the
physics of neutrino processes. To begin with it seemed hopeless, the
more so because there were as many as five extraordinarily difficult
theories of the neutrino field, a clear indication that none of them
was perfect. Yet I managed after all to find something promising. I
was just copying out the formulas when there was a knock.
    I went quickly to the door and cracked it open, blocking the gap
with my body. Snaut’s face appeared, glistening with perspiration.
The corridor behind him was empty.
    “Oh, it’s you,” I said, opening the door further. “Come in.”
    “Yes, it’s me,” he responded. His voice was hoarse, there were bags
under his red eyes, and he was wearing a shiny rubber anti-radiation
apron on elastic suspenders. Underneath it I could see the grubby
legs of the same pants he always wore. His eyes ran around the
circular, evenly lit space and came to a stop when he spotted Harey
standing by an armchair at the far end of the library. We exchanged
the briefest of glances, I lowered my eyelids, at which he gave a slight
bow, and I said in a casual tone:
    “Harey, this is Dr. Snaut. Snaut, this is. . . my wife.”
    “I’m. . . a very rarely seen member of the crew and that’s why.
. .”—the pause extended dangerously—“I’ve not had the opportunity
to make your acquaintance. . .” Harey smiled and put out her hand
which he shook, it seemed to me, with a certain astonishment. He
blinked several times and stood staring at her till I took him by the
arm.
    “Excuse me,” he said then to Harey. “I need a word with you,
Kelvin. . .”
    “Of course,” I replied with the ease of a man about town; it all
sounded to me like cheap comedy, but there was nothing to be done.
“Harey, darling, don’t mind us. Dr. Snaut and I have to talk about our
boring scientific business.”
    And I led him at once to some small armchairs on the other side
of the room. Harey dropped into the chair she’d been sitting in before,
but she pushed it around in such a way that she could see us when
she raised her eyes from her book.
    “What is it?” I asked softly.
    “I got divorced,” he answered just as quietly, though his whisper
had a sibillance about it. At one time I might have laughed at a
story like that and such a conversation opener, but on the Station my
sense of humor had been amputated. “I’ve lived through years since
yesterday, Kelvin,” he added. “A good few years. What’s with you?”
    “Not much,” I answered after a moment, because I didn’t know
what to say. I liked him, but I sensed that at the present moment
I needed to be on my guard with him, or rather with what he had
come to me about.
    “Not much?” he replied in the same tone as me. “I see, so that’s
how things are. . . ?”
    “What do you mean?” I said, pretending I didn’t understand. He
narrowed his bloodshot eyes and, leaning in so close I could feel the
warmth of his breath on my face, he whispered:
    “We’re bogged down, Kelvin. I can’t get a hold of Sartorius any-
more, all I know is what I wrote you about what he said after that
lovely little conference of ours. . .”
    “He’s turned off his visuphone?” I asked.
    “No. There’s a short circuit at his end. It looks like he did it
deliberately, or maybe. . . ” He made a movement with his fist as if
he were smashing something. I looked at him without saying a word.
The left corner of his mouth rose in a disagreeable smile.
    “Kelvin, I came here because. . .”
    He didn’t finish.
    “What do you intend to do?”
    “You mean the letter. . . ?” I replied slowly. “I can do it. I see
no reason to refuse. Actually that’s why I’m sitting here; I wanted to
figure out—”
    “No,” he interrupted, “I didn’t mean that. . .”
    “No?” I said, feigning surprise. “Do tell.”
    “It’s Sartorius,” he murmured after a short pause. “He thinks he’s
found a way. . . you know.”
    He kept his gaze fixed on me. I sat there calmly, striving to make
my expression look indifferent.
    “First there’s that business with the X-rays. What Gibarian was
doing with them, remember. It’s possible to modify it somewhat. . .”
    “How?”
    “All they were doing was sending a bundle of rays into the ocean
and modulating their intensity according to different formulas.”
    “Yes, I know about that. Nilin did it too. And a whole bunch of
others.”
    “Right, but they used soft radiation. This was the hard stuff; they
packed everything they had into the ocean, the whole nine yards.”
    “That could have unpleasant consequences,” I remarked. “It’s a
violation of the Convention of the Four, and of UN restrictions.”
    “Kelvin. . . Don’t act dumb. That’s neither here nor there at this
point. Gibarian’s dead.”
    “Oh, so Sartorius is thinking of blaming the whole thing on him?”
    “I don’t know. I haven’t talked to him about it. That’s not impor-
tant. Sartorius reckons that since guests only appear when we wake
up, it must be extracting the prescription to produce them while we’re
asleep. It thinks our most important state is sleep, precisely. That’s
why it does what it does. So Sartorius wants to send it our waking
state—our conscious thoughts. You follow?”
    “How? By mail?”
    “Save the jokes for later. The bundle of rays will be modified with
the brain waves of one of us.”
    It all suddenly became clear to me.
    “Oh,” I said. “And that one of us would be me. Right?”
    “Yes. He was thinking of you.”
    “I’m deeply grateful.”
    “What do you say?”
    I was silent. Without a word he took an unhurried look at Harey
where she sat immersed in her reading, then turned his gaze back to
me. I felt I was turning pale; I couldn’t stop myself.
    “Well?” he said.
    I shrugged.
    “All those X-ray sermons about the wonderfulness of humankind—
that’s all nonsense in my view. Yours, too. Or am I wrong?”
    “Really?”
    “Really.”
    “Very well then,” he said and smiled, as if I’d granted his wish.
“So you’re opposed to this business of Sartorius’s?”
     I didn’t yet understand what had happened, but from his expres-
sion I realized that he’d led me exactly where he wanted to. I didn’t
speak—what could I have said at that juncture?
     “Excellent,” he said. “Because there’s also another project. To
adapt a Roche machine.”
     “An annihilator. . . ?”
     “Yes. Sartorius has already carried out the preliminary calcula-
tions. It’s doable. It won’t even require a lot of power. The machine
will run twenty-four hours a day or for an unlimited time, to create
an antifield.”
     “W. . .wait! How do you envisage that?!”
     “It’s very simple. It’ll be a neutrino antifield. Ordinary matter
will remain untouched. The only thing to be destroyed will be. . .
neutrino systems. You understand?”
     He gave a satisfied smile. I sat there with my mouth agape.
The smile gradually disappeared from his face. He frowned at me
searchingly and waited.
     “So Project Thought, the first one, we’re rejecting that. Right? And
the second one? Sartorius is working on it already. We’re going to call
it Project Freedom.”
     I closed my eyes for a moment. I’d suddenly made up my mind.
Snaut was not a physicist. Sartorius had turned his visuphone off or
broken it. Very well.
     “I’d call it rather Project Butchery,” I said slowly.
     “You were a butcher yourself. Am I not right? Now things will be
quite different. No guests, no G-formations—nothing. The moment
the materialization appears, it’ll disintegrate.”
     “You misunderstand,” I replied, shaking my head with a smile
that I hoped looked sufficiently natural. “These aren’t moral scruples,
they’re a survival instinct. I don’t want to die, Snaut.”
     “What. . . ?”
     He was taken aback. He gave me a suspicious look. From my
pocket I pulled out the crumpled sheet of paper containing the for-
mulas.
     “I’ve been thinking about it too. Does that surprise you? After
all, I was the first one to propose the neutrino hypothesis, you won’t
deny that? So look: an antifield can be built. For ordinary matter it’s
harmless. That much is true. But at the moment of destabilization,
when the neutrino system begins to disintegrate, the energy of its
bonds will be released as surplus. If we assume ten to the eighth ergs
for every kilogram of rest mass, for one G-formation we get between
five and seven times ten to the eighth. Do you know what that means?
The equivalent of a small uranium charge going off inside the Station.”
    “What are you saying! But. . . surely Sartorius must have taken
that into consideration. . .”
    “Not necessarily,” I retorted with a malicious smile. “The thing
is, Sartorius belongs to the Frazer and Cajolli school. According to
them, at the moment of disintegration the entire energy of the bonds
is released in the form of light radiation. There’d be just a powerful
flash, maybe not completely safe, but not destructive. But there are
other hypotheses, other theories of the neutrino field. According to
Cayatt, according to Avalov, to Siona, the emission spectrum is much
broader, with the maximum occurring as hard gamma radiation. It’s
very nice that Sartorius trusts his masters and their theory, but there
are others, Snaut. And you know what else?” I went on, seeing that
my words had made an impression on him. “The ocean also needs
to be taken into consideration. If it did what it did, for sure it used
the best possible method. In other words: its activities seem to me
an argument in favor of the other school and against Sartorius.”
    “Let me see that paper, Kelvin. . .”
    I handed it to him. He peered at it, trying to make sense of my
scribblings.
    “What’s that?” He pointed with his finger.
    I took the paper back.
    “That’s the field transmutation tensor.”
    “Let me have it. . .”
    “What do you need it for?” I asked. I knew what he’d say.
    “I have to show Sartorius.”
    “As you wish,” I replied indifferently. “You can take it. The point
is, no one has tested this experimentally; we’ve never known these
kinds of systems before. He believes in Frazer, I followed Siona in
my calculations. He’ll tell you I’m not a physicist and that Siona
isn’t either. At least not in his estimation. But that’s a matter for
discussion. I’ve no wish to engage in a debate that could result in my
being vaporized, to the greater glory of Sartorius. You I can convince,
but not him. And I’m not going to try.”
     “So what do you mean to do. . . ? He’s working on it,” said Snaut
in a toneless voice. He hunched over; all his liveliness was gone. I
didn’t know if he trusted me, but I no longer cared.
     “What a person does when someone’s trying to kill him,” I replied
quietly.
     “I’ll try and get in touch with him. Maybe he’s planning some
safety measures,” murmured Snaut. He raised his eyes to me: “Listen,
maybe the first project after all. . . ? Hm? Sartorius would agree. For
sure. It’s. . . at least. . . a shot. . .”
     “Do you believe that?”
     “No,” he replied at once. “But. . . how could it hurt?”
     I didn’t want to agree too readily, since that was what I wanted.
He was becoming my ally in playing for time.
     “I’ll think about it,” I said.
     “All right, I’m off,” he mumbled, getting up. His bones cracked as
he rose from the chair. “So you’ll let us make an encephalogram of
you?” he asked, rubbing his apron with his fingers as if he were trying
to erase an unseen stain.
     “OK,” I said. Without looking at Harey (who was watching the
scene silently, her book on her lap), he went to the door. When it
closed behind him I stood up. I unfolded the paper I held in my
hand. The formulas were good. I hadn’t doctored them. Though I’m
not sure Siona would have recognized my solution. Probably not. I
gave a start. Harey had come up behind me and touched me on the
shoulder.
     “Kris!”
     “What is it, darling?”
     “Who was that?”
     “I told you. Dr. Snaut.”
     “What kind of a person is he?”
     “I don’t know him that well. Why do you ask?”
     “He was looking at me in this strange way. . .”
    “He probably found you attractive.”
    “No,” she said with a shake of her head. “It wasn’t that kind of
look. He was looking at me as if. . . as if he. . .”
    She shuddered, raised her eyes at me then lowered them right
away.
    “Let’s go somewhere else. . .”