I had been lying in the dark room, in a trance, staring at the illu-
minated face of the watch on my wrist, for I don’t know how long.
I was listening to my own breathing and feeling surprised at some-
thing, but all of this—the staring at the greenish ring of figures, and
the surprise—was steeped in an indifference I put down to exhaus-
tion. I turned on my side. The bed was oddly wide, something was
missing. I held my breath. There was absolute silence. I froze. Not
the slightest whisper came from anywhere. Harey? Why couldn’t I
hear her breathing? I felt the bedding with my hand: I was alone.
    “Harey!” I was about to call out, but I heard footsteps. It was
someone large and heavy, like. . .
    “Gibarian?” I said calmly.
    “Yes, it’s me. Don’t turn the light on.”
    “Really?”
    “There’s no need. That way it’ll be better for both of us.”
    “But you’re dead?”
    “It doesn’t matter. I mean, you do recognize my voice?”
    “Yes. Why did you do it?”
    “I had to. You were four days late. If you’d gotten here sooner it
might not have been necessary. But don’t feel bad. I’m fine.”
    “Are you really here?”
    “Oh, you think you’re dreaming, like you thought about Harey?”
    “Where is she?”
    “What makes you think I know?”
    “I’m guessing you do.”
    “Keep that thought to yourself. Let’s just say I’m here instead of
her.”
    “I want her to be here as well.”
    “That’s not possible.”
    “Why not? Look, you do know that really it’s not you, it’s me,
right?”
    “No. It’s really me. If you wanted to be pedantic you could say it’s
me again. But let’s not waste words.”
    “Will you go away?”
    “Yes.”
    “And then she’ll come back?”
    “Is that what you want? What is she to you?”
    “That’s my business.”
    “But you’re afraid of her.”
    “No, I’m not.”
    “And disgusted by her. . .”
    “What do you want from me?”
    “You can feel sorry for yourself, but not for her. She’s always going
to be twenty years old. Don’t pretend you don’t know that!”
    All of a sudden, I have no idea why, I calmed down. I listened
to him with equanimity. I had the impression he was standing ever
closer, at the foot of the bed, but I still couldn’t see anything in the
darkness.
    “What are you after?” I asked quietly. My tone seemed to surprise
him. He was silent for a moment.
    “Sartorius has convinced Snaut that you hoodwinked him. Now
they’re doing the same to you. They’re pretending to assemble the
X-ray equipment but they’re actually building a field annihilator.”
    “Where is she?” I asked.
    “Did you not hear what I just said to you? I’m trying to warn you!”
    “Where is she?”
    “I don’t know. Listen up: you’ll need a weapon. You can’t count
on anyone.”
    “I can count on Harey,” I said. I heard a low rapid sound. He was
laughing.
    “Sure you can. Up to a certain point. In the end you can always
do what I did.”
    “You’re not Gibarian.”
    “How do you like that. And who am I? A dream of yours maybe?”
    “No. Their puppet. But you don’t know it.”
    “And how do you know who you are!”
    That made me think. I wanted to get up but I couldn’t. Gibarian
was saying something. I couldn’t understand the words, I only heard
the sound of his voic.; I was struggling desperately with the weakness
of the flesh. I made one more colossal effort, jerked my body. . . and
woke up. I gasped for air like a half-suffocated fish. It was completely
dark. It had been a dream. A nightmare. But just a moment. . . “a
dilemma we’re not able to resolve. We persecute our own selves. All
Polytheria did was apply a kind of selective amplifier to our thoughts.
Seeking a motivation for this is anthropomorphism. Where there are
no humans, there are none of the motives available to humans. To
continue the projected research we’d have had to destroy either our
own thoughts or their material realization. The former is beyond our
powers. The latter looks too much like murder.”
    In the darkness I listened to the distant, measured voice that I had
recognized at once: it was Gibarian. I stretched out my hand. The
bed was empty.
    I’ve woken into another dream, I thought.
    “Gibarian. . . ?” I said. The voice broke off at once in mid-word.
There was a soft click and I felt a faint puff of air on my face.
    “Really, Gibarian,” I muttered with a yawn. “Following someone
from one dream into another, come off it. . .”
    There was a rustling sound next to me.
    “Gibarian!” I repeated more loudly.
    The bedsprings moved.
    “Kris. . . It’s me. . . ,” came a whisper right by me.
    “Oh, it’s you, Harey. . . Where’s Gibarian?”
    “Kris. . . Kris. . . surely he’s. . . you yourself said he died. . .”
    “He might be alive in a dream,” I said slowly. I was no longer at
all certain it had been a dream. “He was saying something. He was
here,” I added. I was fearfully sleepy. If I’m sleepy, I must be asleep, I
thought to myself idiotically. I brushed Harey’s cold arm with my lips
and arranged myself more comfortably. She said something in reply,
but I was already plunged in oblivion.
    In the morning, in the red sunlight of the room, I recalled the
events of the night. The conversation with Gibarian had been a dream,
but the things that had happened next? I’d heard his voice, I could
have sworn it; I just didn’t quite remember what he’d been saying. It
hadn’t sounded like a conversation, more like a lecture. A lecture. . .
?
    Harey was getting washed. I heard the splash of water in the
bathroom. I looked under the bed, where I’d shoved the tape recorder
a few days before. It wasn’t there.
    “Harey!” I called. Her face, dripping water, appeared from behind
the locker.
    “You didn’t see a tape recorder under the bed by any chance, did
you? A little pocket-sized one?”
    “There were various things under there. I put them all over on
that shelf.” She pointed to near the medicine cabinet and vanished
back into the bathroom. I jumped out of bed, but I couldn’t find what
I was looking for.
    “You must have seen it,” I said when she came back into the main
room. She combed her hair in front of the mirror and didn’t reply.
It was only now I noticed she was pale, and that when her eyes met
mine in the mirror there was a searching look in them.
    “Harey,” I began again insistently, “the tape recorder isn’t on the
shelf.”
    “You don’t have anything more important to tell me?”
    “I’m sorry,” I murmured. “You’re right, it’s not that big of a deal.”
    That was all we needed—to start an argument!
    After that we went to get breakfast. Harey was doing everything
differently than usual that day, but I couldn’t put my finger on what
exactly had changed. She was looking closely at everything around
her; a couple of times she didn’t hear what I was saying to her, as if
she’d suddenly gotten lost in thought. One time, when she raised her
head I saw her eyes were glistening.
     “What’s wrong?” I asked, lowering my voice to a whisper. “Are you
crying?”
     “Let it be. They’re not real tears,” she stammered. Perhaps I
shouldn’t have left it at that, but there was nothing I was so afraid of
as “heart-to-hearts.” Besides, I had other things on my mind. Though
I knew Snaut and Sartorius’s scheming had only been a dream, I’d
begun to wonder if there was some kind of handy weapon on the
Station. I’d no idea what I would do with it; I just wanted to have
it. I told Harey I needed to swing by the hold and the depositories.
She followed me in silence. I searched among the crates and rifled
through the capsules; then, when I went all the way down to the
lowest floor, I couldn’t resist the temptation to look in on the cold
room. I didn’t want Harey to go in there though, so I just half-opened
the door and checked the whole place over with my eyes. The dark
shroud bulged over the elongated figure beneath, but from where I
was standing I couldn’t tell if the black woman was still lying where
she had been. It seemed to me that her place was empty.
     I didn’t find anything I could use, and I was in an ever-worsening
mood as I wandered about, till all at once I realized I couldn’t
see Harey. She appeared right after that—she’d stayed back in the
corridor—yet the very fact she’d tried to distance herself from me,
something that was so hard for her even for a moment, should have
made me think. But I was still acting offended at no one in particular,
or just generally behaving like a jerk. I’d gotten a headache, I couldn’t
find any aspirin and, mad as hell, I tipped out the entire contents of
the first aid kit. I couldn’t be bothered to go back to the surgery; I’d
rarely been such a mess as I was that day. Harey was moving about
the cabin like a shadow; from time to time she’d disappear. In the
afternoon, after we’d eaten lunch (though in fact she rarely ate at all,
while I’d lost my appetite from the headache and didn’t even press
her to have something). All of a sudden she sat down next to me and
began picking at the sleeve of my shirt.
     “How’s it going?” I murmured absently. I had an urge to go
upstairs, because I had the impression the pipes were carrying a faint
echo of knocking sounds, meaning that Sartorius was tinkering with
the high-tension apparatus. But I lost interest when it occurred to
me that I’d have to go with Harey, whose presence might have been
semi-understandable in the library, but there, among the machinery,
might have led Snaut to make some inopportune remark.
    “Kris,” she whispered, “how are things between us. . . ?”
    I gave a sigh despite myself. I can’t say it was a happy day for me.
    “Couldn’t be better. Why do you ask?”
    “I wanted to have a talk with you.”
    “Fire away.”
    “Not that kind of talk.”
    “Then what kind? Like I said, I’ve got a headache, I’ve all kind of
things on my mind. . .”
    “A little good will, Kris.”
    I forced myself to smile. It couldn’t have been impressive.
    “What is it, darling? I’m listening.”
    “Will you tell me the truth?”
    I raised my eyebrows. I didn’t like this as an opener.
    “Why would I lie?”
    “You might have your reasons. Serious ones. But if you want there
to be. . . you know. . . then don’t lie to me.”
    I said nothing.
    “I’ll tell you something and you’ll tell me something. OK? It’ll be
the truth. Regardless of anything else.”
    I wasn’t looking her in the eye. She sought my gaze, but I pre-
tended not to notice.
    “I already told you that I don’t know how I got here. But maybe
you know. Wait, I haven’t finished. Maybe you don’t know. But if you
know and it’s just that you’re not able to tell me now, then will you
later, one day? That won’t be the worst thing. In any case you’ll give
me a chance.”
    I had the sensation of an icy current running through my entire
body.
    “What are you saying, kid? What chance. . . ?” I mumbled.
    “Kris, whoever I am, I’m for sure no kid. You promised. Tell me.”
    That “whoever I am” gave me such a lump in my throat that all I
could do was stare at her, shaking my head like an idiot, as if I were
trying to prevent myself from hearing everything.
    “I already said you don’t have to tell me. It’s enough for you to
say you can’t.”
    “I’m not hiding anything. . . ,” I answered hoarsely.
    “Very good then,” she replied, standing up. I wanted to say some-
thing. I sensed I shouldn’t leave her like that, but all the words stuck
in my throat.
    “Harey. . .”
    She was by the window, her back to me. The empty dark blue
ocean lay beneath a bare sky.
    “Harey, if you think that. . . Harey, you know I love you. . .”
    “You love me?”
    I went up to her. I tried to put my arms around her. She freed
herself, pushing my hand aside.
    “You’re so good,” she said. “You love me? I’d rather you beat me!”
    “Harey, darling!”
    “No. No. Best just don’t say a thing.”
    She went up to the table and began clearing away the plates. I
stared into the dark blue emptiness. The sun was starting to set, and
the great shadow of the Station moved evenly on the waves. A plate
slipped out of Harey’s hands and fell on the floor. Water sounded in
the sinks. At the edges of the horizon the ruddy color turned to a
dirty reddish gold. If only I knew what to do. Oh, if only I knew. All
at once things went quiet. Harey came and stood right by me.
    “No. Don’t turn around,” she said, lowering her voice to a whisper.
“None of this is your fault, Kris. I know it. Don’t worry.”
    I reached out my hand towards her. She escaped to the other side
of the cabin and, picking up a whole pile of plates, she said:
    “Pity. If they could be broken, I’d smash them, I really would
smash all of them!”
    For a moment I thought she was actually going to fling them to
the ground, but she threw me a keen glance and smiled.
    “Don’t be scared, I’m not going to make a scene.”
     I woke up in the middle of the night, instantly intent and watchful.
I sat up in bed; the room was dark, though a faint light came from the
corridor through the cracked-open door. There was a nasty hissing
sound that was intensifying, and at the same time there were dull
stifled thuds as if something large were thrashing about in the next
room. A meteor! came a rapid thought. It’s broken through the armor
plating. Someone’s there! There was a prolonged wheezing.
     I finally regained my senses. It was the Station, not a rocket; and
that awful noise. . .
     I ran into the corridor. The door to the small lab was wide open
and the light was on. I hurried inside.
     I was struck by a wave of fearful cold. The cabin was filled with
vapor that turned my breath to snow. A mass of white flakes were
spinning over a body wrapped in a bathrobe that was lying on the
floor and tossing weakly. I could barely see her through the icy cloud.
I rushed up to her, picked her up. The robe burned my hands; she
was rasping. I ran back into the corridor, past a series of doors. I no
longer felt the cold, except that the breath coming out of her mouth
in clouds of condensation scorched my neck like fire.
     I laid her on the table, tore open the robe over her breasts. For a
moment I looked at her drawn, trembling face; the blood had frozen
on her open lips, covering them with a dark coating. Tiny ice crystals
glittered on her tongue. . .
     Liquid oxygen. There was liquid oxygen in the shop, in Dewar
flasks. As I picked her up I’d felt broken glass underfoot. How much
could she have swallowed? It made no difference. Her trachea was
burned, and her throat and lungs; liquid oxygen is more caustic than
any concentrated acid. Her breathing, raucous and dry as the sound
of paper being torn, was growing shallower. Her eyes were closed. It
was the death throes.
     I looked at the large glass-paneled cabinets with instruments and
medications. A tracheotomy? An intubation? Except she had no lungs!
They were burned up. Medication? There were so many different
kinds! The shelves were filled with colored bottles and packets. The
wheezing sound filled the whole room; vapor was still coming from
her open mouth.
     Hot water bottles. . .
     I started looking for them, but before I found any I darted across
to the other cabinet and began rifling through boxes of ampoules.
Now I found a needle, which I fumbled to put in the sterilizer, my
fingers stiff with cold and clumsy. I hammered furiously on the lid
of the sterilizer, but I couldn’t even feel it, the only sensation was a
slight tingling. She made a louder wheezing sound. I hurried over to
her. Her eyes were open.
     “Harey!”
     It wasn’t even a whisper. I couldn’t speak. Her face was alien, as
if made of plaster; it brought me up sharp. Her ribs were twitching
under her white skin; her hair, wet from melting snow, lay scattered
around her head. She was looking at me.
     “Harey!”
     I was unable to say any more. I stood there like a lump of wood
with those unwieldy foreign hands of mine. My feet, lips, eyelids were
starting to sting ever more painfully, but I barely felt it. A droplet
of blood that had melted in the heat ran down her cheek, leaving a
diagonal mark. Her tongue quivered and disappeared; she was still
rasping.
     I took her wrist; she had no pulse. I pulled apart the lapels of the
robe and placed my ear against the fearfully cold body right beneath
her breast. Through a crackling roar like a fire I heard a pit-a-pat,
a galloping sound too fast to count. I stood there leaning over her,
my eyes closed, when something touched my head. She had dug her
fingers into my hair. I looked into her eyes.
     “Kris,” she croaked. I grasped her hand in mine; she squeezed it
back, almost crushing it. Consciousness was ebbing from her horribly
distorted face; the whites of her eyes flashed beneath her eyelids,
there was a snort from her throat and her whole body was shaken by
convulsions. I was barely able to hold onto her as she hung over the
side of the table. She knocked her head against the side of a porcelain
funnel. I pulled her up and pressed her to the table; with each new
spasm she tugged away from me. I immediately became drenched in
sweat, my legs felt like cotton wool. When the convulsions eased off
I tried to lie her down again. She was making a squeaking sound as
she gasped for air. All of a sudden, Harey’s eyes lit up in that terrible
bloody face.
     “Kris,” she gasped, “How much. . . how much longer, Kris?”
     She began to choke; foam appeared on her lips and the convul-
sions began again. I held her down with all the strength I had left.
She collapsed on her back so abruptly her teeth clattered; she was
panting.
     “No, no, no,” she exclaimed rapidly with each outbreath; each one
seemed it would be the last. But the convulsions returned again and
once more she writhed in my arms, in the short pauses drawing in
air with such an effort her ribcage bulged. Finally her eyelids dropped
half way over her open, unseeing eyes. She stopped moving. I thought
it was the end. I didn’t even try to wipe the pink foam from her lips.
I stood over her, leaning forward, hearing some great distant bell, and
waited for her last breath so that after it I could crumple onto the
floor; but she kept on breathing, only slightly wheezing, ever quieter,
and the tip of her breast, which had almost stopped quivering, began
to move to the quick rhythm of a working heart. I stood hunched
over her, and her face began to regain color. I still didn’t understand
a thing. The palms of both my hands grew moist, and I felt I was
going deaf, that something soft and springy was filling my ears; I
could still hear the ringing bell, which now sounded hollow, like with
a broken heart.
     She raised her eyelids and our eyes met.
     “Harey,” I tried to say, but I seemed to have no mouth. My face
was a heavy lifeless mask, and all I could do was look.
     Her eyes ran around the room. Her head moved. Everything was
completely quiet. Behind me, in another, far-off world, water was
dripping regularly from a tap that hadn’t been properly turned off.
She rose on one elbow. She sat up. I drew back. She was watching
me.
     “So. . . ,” she said. “So. . . ? It didn’t. . . work? Why not. . . ?
Why are you looking at me like that. . . ?”
     And suddenly, with a terrible scream:
     “Why are you looking at me like that!!”
     Silence fell. She looked at her hands. Wiggled her fingers.
     “Is this me. . . ?” she asked.
     “Harey,” I said without breath, merely moving my lips. She raised
her head.
     “Harey. . . ?” she repeated. She slid down slowly onto the floor
and stood up. She staggered, regained her balance, took a few steps.
All this she did in a kind of daze, looking at me but seemingly without
seeing me.
     “Harey,” she repeated slowly one more time. “But . . . I. . . I’m
not Harey. And who. . . am I? Harey? And you, you?!”
     Suddenly her eyes opened wide, flashed, and the shadow of a
smile, of utter astonishment, lit up her face.
     “Maybe you too? Kris! Maybe you too?!”
     I said nothing, leaning back against a locker, where fear had driven
me.
     She dropped her arms.
     “No,” she said. “No, because you’re afraid. Listen to me, though,
I can’t do it. This isn’t right. I didn’t know anything about it. I
still don’t get it even now. I mean, surely it’s not possible?” She
clenched her fists so tight they turned white, and pressed them to her
chest. “I don’t know anything except, except Harey! Do you think I’m
pretending maybe? I’m not pretending, cross my heart, I’m not.”
     Her last words turned into a groan. She slumped to the floor,
sobbing. What she had shouted had shattered something inside of
me; in one long stride I reached her and seized her in my arms. She
fought back, pushing me away, sobbing without tears, exclaiming:
     “Let me go! Let me go! I disgust you! I know! I don’t want things
this way! I don’t! You see it, you know you do, that it’s not me, not
me, not me.”
     “Quiet!” I cried, shaking her; we were both screaming, on our
knees facing one another. Harey’s head was thrashing, knocking
against my shoulder; I pulled her to myself with all my strength.
All of a sudden we were still, breathing heavily. Water was dripping
evenly from the faucet.
     “Kris,” she mumbled, pressing her face into my arm. “Tell me
what I need to do so I won’t be there anymore. Kris. . .”
     “Stop it!” I yelled. She raised her face. Stared at me.
     “What do you mean. . . ? You don’t know either? There’s nothing
can be done? Nothing?”
     “Harey. . . . for pity’s sake. . .”
     “I wanted to. . . you saw. No. No. Let me go, I don’t want you to
touch me! I disgust you.”
     “That’s not true!”
     “You’re lying. I must disgust you. I. . . I disgust myself. . . as
well. If I could. If I only could. . .”
     “You’d kill yourself.”
     “Yes.”
     “But I don’t want that, you understand? I don’t want you to kill
yourself. I want you to be here, with me, I don’t need anything else!”
     Her huge gray eyes devoured me.
     “If you’re lying. . . ,” she said ever so softly.
     I let go of her and stood up. She sat back on the floor.
     “Tell me what I need to do to make you believe I’m saying what I
think. That it’s the truth. That there’s no other.”
     “You can’t say the truth. I’m not Harey.”
     “Then who are you?”
     She was silent for a long while. Her chin twitched over and over,
till she lowered her head and whispered:
     “Harey. . . but. . . but I know that isn’t true. It’s not me. . . that
you loved back then, long ago. . .”
     “Yes,” I said. “What was then is dead and gone. But you, here, I
love. You understand?”
     She shook her head.
     “You’re good. Don’t think I don’t appreciate all that you’ve done.
You did the best you could. But it can’t be helped. When I sat by your
bed in the early morning three days ago, waiting for you to wake up,
I didn’t know a thing. That seems such a very long time ago. I was
acting like I wasn’t all there. It was like my head was filled with fog.
I didn’t remember what had come earlier and what had come later,
and nothing surprised me, it was like coming round after anesthetic,
or recovering from a long illness. I even thought maybe I’d been sick,
and it was just that you wouldn’t tell me. Then later, more and more
things made me wonder. You know which things. I already had an
inkling after the conversation you had in the library with that, what’s
his name, Snaut. And since you wouldn’t say anything, I got up in the
night and played the tape recorder. I only lied that one time, because
I hid it afterwards, Kris. What was the name of the man who was
talking on it?”
    “Gibarian.”
    “Right, Gibarian. At that moment I understood everything, though
truth be told I still didn’t understand anything. There was one thing I
didn’t know: that I couldn’t. . . that I wasn’t. . . that it would end. .
. without an end. He didn’t say anything about that. Though maybe
he did, but you woke up and I turned off the tape. Even so, I heard
enough to find out that I’m not a person but an instrument.”
    “What are you talking about?”
    “That’s right. To test your reactions or something like that. Each
of you has something like me. It’s based on memories or on the
imagination; it’s suppressed. Something along those lines. Besides,
you know all this better than I do. He said such terrible, inconceivable
things, if it hadn’t all added up I don’t think I would have believed
him!”
    “What added up?”
    “You know, that I don’t need sleep and I always have to be by you.
Yesterday morning I still thought you hated me, and that made me
sad. Good Lord, how stupid I was. But tell me, tell me yourself, could
I have imagined this? I mean, he didn’t hate that woman of his at all,
but the things he said about her! It was only then I understood that
whatever I might do it made no difference, because whether I want it
or not, it must be torture for you. Or actually even worse, because a
torture implement is as lifeless and innocent as a rock that can fall
and kill you. But an implement that could have good intentions and
could love—this I couldn’t imagine. I’d like to tell you at least what
went on inside me then, later, when I understood, when I listened to
the tape. It might at least come in useful for you. I even tried to write
it down. . .”
    “Is that why you turned on the light?” I asked; I suddenly felt
choked, I had difficulty speaking.
    “Yes. But nothing came of it. Because I was searching inside
myself, you know . . . for them—for that something else, I was
completely mad, I can tell you! For a while I had the feeling that I
didn’t have a body under my skin, that inside me there was something
else, that I was only a surface. There to fool you. You follow?”
     “I do.”
     “When you lie for hours through the night like that, in your
thoughts you can go very far, and in very strange directions, you
know. . .”
     “I know.”
     “But I could feel my heart, and besides, I remembered that you’d
tested my blood. What’s my blood like, tell me, tell me the truth.
Surely you can now.”
     “It’s the same as mine.”
     “Really?”
     “I swear.”
     “What does that mean? You know, later it occurred to me that
maybe it is hidden inside me, that it’s. . . I mean, it could be very
small. But I didn’t know where. Now I think that at bottom I was
dodging the issue, because I was terrified of what I planned to do,
and I was looking for another way out. But Kris, if I have the same
blood. . . if it’s the way you say, then. . . No, that’s not possible. I
mean, I’d be dead already, wouldn’t I? That means there is something
after all, but where is it? Maybe in my head? Yet my thoughts are
completely ordinary. . . and I don’t know anything. . . If I were
thinking through it, I ought to know everything right away, and not
love you, just pretend, and know that I’m pretending. . . Kris, please,
tell me all you know, maybe something can be done after all?”
     “What could be done?”
     She was silent.
     “Do you want to die?”
     “I think so.”
     Once again there was silence. I stood above her as she sat there
hunched over. I stared at the empty interior of the room, the white
enameled surfaces of the apparatus, at the shining scattered imple-
ments, as if I were searching for something terribly necessary and I
couldn’t find it.
    “Harey, can I say something too?”
    She waited.
    “It’s true that you’re not entirely like me. But that doesn’t mean
you’re worse. Quite the opposite. Well, you can think any way you
like about it, but it’s thanks to that. . . that you survived.”
    A kind of pathetic childlike smile appeared on her face.
    “Is that supposed to mean I’m. . . immortal?”
    “I don’t know. In any case you’re a lot less mortal than me.”
    “How awful,” she whispered.
    “Maybe not as much as you think.”
    “But you don’t envy me. . .”
    “Harey, it’s more a question of your. . . purpose, as I might
call it. You know, here on the Station your purpose is essentially as
mysterious as mine, as that of any of us. The other men are going to
continue Gibarian’s experiment and anything could happen. . .”
    “Or nothing.”
    “Or nothing, and to be honest I’d rather it was nothing, not even
because I’m afraid (though I guess that plays a part, I’m not sure), but
because it won’t do any good. That’s the one thing I’m certain of.”
    “It won’t do any good ? Why not? Is it about the. . . the ocean?”
    She shuddered.
    “That’s right. It’s about contact. In my view, the whole thing is in
essence extremely simple. Contact means an exchange of experiences,
concepts, or at least results, conditions. But what if there’s nothing
to exchange? If an elephant isn’t a very large bacterium, then an
ocean can’t be a very large brain. Of course, various actions can be
performed by both sides. As a result of one of them I’m looking at
you right now and trying to explain to you that you’re more precious
to me than the twelve years of my life I devoted to Solaris, and
that I want to go on being with you. Perhaps your appearance was
meant to be torture, perhaps a reward, or perhaps just a test under a
microscope. An expression of friendship, a treacherous blow, perhaps
a taunt? Perhaps everything at once or—as seems most likely to me—
something entirely different. But what can you and I really care about
the intentions of our parents, however different they were from one
another? You can say that our future depends on those intentions,
and I’d agree with you. I can’t predict what’s to come. Nor can you.
I can’t even assure you I’ll always love you. If so much has already
happened, then anything can happen. Maybe tomorrow I’ll turn into
a green jellyfish? It doesn’t depend on me. But in what does depend
on us, we’ll be together. Is that not something?”
    “Listen,” she said, “there’s one other thing. Am I. . . really like. . .
her?”
    “You were,” I said, “but now I don’t know any more.”
    “What do you mean. . . ?”
    She got to her feet and looked at me with eyes wide open.
    “You’ve already taken her place.”
    “And you’re sure it’s not her but me that you. . . Me?”
    “Yes. You. I don’t know. I’m afraid that if you were really her, I’d
not be able to love you.”
    “Why not?”
    “Because I did something terrible.”
    “To her?”
    “Yes. When we were—”
    “Don’t say.”
    “Why not?”
    “Because I want you to know that I’m not her.”