“Kris, is it because of this experiment?”
     I flinched at the sound of her voice. I’d been lying sleepless for
hours, staring into the darkness, alone, because I couldn’t even hear
her breathing, and in the tangled labyrinth of nighttime thoughts that
were feverish, half logical, and thus acquired a new dimension and
meaning, I’d forgotten about her.
     “What. . . How did you know I wasn’t asleep. . . ?” I asked. There
was fear in my voice.
     “From the way you’re breathing,” she said quietly, as if apologet-
ically. “I didn’t mean to bother you. . . If you can’t talk, don’t. .
.”
     “No, why not. Yes, it’s the experiment. You guessed.”
     “What do they expect it to accomplish?”
     “They don’t know themselves. Something. Anything. This isn’t
Operation Thought, it’s Operation Despair. Now they only need only
one thing, someone who’ll have enough courage to make a decision,
but most people see that kind of courage as ordinary cowardice,
because it’s a retreat, you know, surrender, an escape that’s unworthy
of a person. As if worthiness was plodding forward and getting bogged
down, and drowning in something you don’t understand and never
will.”
     I broke off, but before my quickened breathing calmed down I
gave vent to a new burst of anger:
    “Of course there’s never any lack of guys with a practical outlook.
They said that even if contact isn’t made, still, by studying the plasma
and all those crazy living cities that pop out of it for a single day then
disappear again, we’ll learn the secrets of matter, as if they didn’t know
they’re fooling themselves. They’re wandering around in a library of
books written in an unknown language, and just looking at the colors
of the spines. . . That’s how it is!”
    “Are there no other planets like this?”
    “No one knows. Perhaps there are, but we only know this one.
In any case it’s something extremely rare, unlike Earth. Us, we’re
common, we’re the grass of the universe, and we take pride in our
commonness, that it’s so widespread, and we thought it could en-
compass everything. It was a kind of schema we took with us when
we set off intrepidly and joyfully on our long journey: other worlds!
But what exactly are they, those other worlds? We’d conquer them or
we’d be conquered, there was nothing else in those wretched brains
of ours. It wasn’t worth it. It really wasn’t.”
    I got up; in the dark I found the first aid kit and a flat bottle of
sleeping pills.
    “I’m going to get some sleep, darling,” I said, turning towards the
darkness, from where there came the high-pitched hum of the air
conditioning. “I need to sleep. Otherwise I really don’t know. . .”
    I sat back down on the bed. She touched my hand. I put my arms
around her, unseen, and held her without moving until my grip was
loosened by slumber.
    In the morning, when I woke fresh and rested, the experiment
seemed trivial to me; I couldn’t understand how I could have attached
so much importance to it. I didn’t care either that Harey had to go
to the lab with me. All her efforts became futile after I’d been gone
from the room for a few minutes, so I gave up any thoughts of further
attempts, even though she herself urged them (she was even prepared
to be locked up somewhere); I suggested she take a book to read.
    I was interested less in the procedure itself than in what I’d find
in the laboratory. Aside from certain evident gaps in the bookcases
and the cabinets with chemical glassware (in addition to which, panes
were missing in the doors of several of the cabinets, while one of the
doors itself had a star-shaped crack as if there’d been a recent strug-
gle whose traces had been hurriedly though rather carefully covered
over), there was nothing out of the ordinary in that blue and white
room. Snaut, who was bustling about among the equipment, behaved
entirely correctly, accepting the presence of Harey as something quite
ordinary, and bowing slightly to her from a distance. As he was moist-
ening my temples and forehead with conductive gel, Sartorius came
in through a small door that led to the darkroom. He was wearing a
white lab coat, over which he had a black anti-radiation apron that
reached down to his ankles. Brisk and matter-of-fact, he greeted me
as if we were just two employees among a hundred at some big insti-
tute on Earth and had seen each other just the previous day. It was
only now I noticed that the lifeless expression of his face came from
contact lenses, which he wore instead of eyeglasses.
     Arms folded on his chest, he stood and watched as Snaut wrapped
a bandage around the electrodes attached to my head, forming a kind
of white cap. Several times he cast his eyes about the whole room,
seeming not to notice Harey, who sat hunched and uncomfortable on
a small stool by the wall, pretending to read her book. When Snaut
stepped away from my chair I moved my head, which was weighed
down with metal and wires, to watch him turn on the apparatus. But
all at once Sartorius raised his hand and said unctuously:
     “Doctor Kelvin! I’d like to ask for a moment of your attention! I
don’t wish to impose anything on you, for that would not serve our
purpose; but you need to stop thinking about yourself, about me,
about our colleague Snaut, about any other persons, so that by elim-
inating the randomness of particular individuals, you concentrate on
the matter at hand. Earth and Solaris; generations of researchers who
constitute a whole, despite the fact that particular people have their
beginnings and endings; our unyielding efforts at establishing intellec-
tual contact; the historical path taken by humanity; the certainty that
it will be continued into the future; the readiness to make any effort
and any sacrifice, to give up all personal feelings in the interests of
our mission—these are the subjects that ought to fill your conscious-
ness completely. True, the sequence of associations does not depend
entirely on your will, but the fact that you are here at all guarantees
the authenticity of the continuity I speak of. If you are uncertain you
have performed the task appropriately please say so, and Dr. Snaut
will repeat the recording. After all, we do not lack for time. . .”
     He uttered these last words with a pale dry smile that did not
detract in the slightest from the expression of penetrating consterna-
tion in his eyes. I was writhing inside from this mountain of cliches
pronounced with such earnestness and gravity; fortunately Snaut in-
terrupted the lengthening silence.
     “Shall we, Kris?” he asked, leaning on the high console of the
electroencephalograph, in a casual, unconstrained pose, as if he were
resting his elbow on an armchair. I was grateful to him for using my
first name.
     “Yes,” I said, half-closing my eyes. The jitters that had laid waste
to my mind when he finished attaching the electrodes and placed his
fingers on the switch suddenly passed; through my eyelashes I could
see the pinkish glow of the control lights on the black dashboard of
the machine. The cold, disagreeable chill of the metal electrodes,
pressed to my head like frozen coins, also went away. I was like a
dark, unlit stage. The empty space was surrounded on all sides by
an invisible crowd of spectators gathered in a circle around a silence
filled with an ironic contempt for Sartorius and the Mission. The
tension felt by these inner observers, eager to play an improvised role,
grew weaker. “Harey?”—I thought the word as a test, with a sickening
unease, prepared to withdraw it immediately. But that blind, attentive
audience of mine did not protest. For a certain short time I was
nothing but pure tenderness, sincere regret, willing to undertake long,
patient sacrifices. Harey filled me, lacking features, shape, face; and
at the same time, through the impersonal idea of her, infused with
desperate affection, I had a vision of Giese, the father of solaristics
and of solaricists, in all the dignity of his professorial presence. But
I wasn’t thinking about the muddy explosion, about the stinking void
that swallowed up his gold-rimmed spectacles and his scrupulously
brushed gray mustache. I could only see the engraving on the title
page of his monograph, the densely hatched background the artist
had added around his head such that it appeared unsuspectingly
almost in an aureola, so similar not in its features but its steadfast
old-fashioned prudence to the face of my own father, and in the end
I didn’t know which of the two of them was looking at me. Neither of
them had a grave, something that in our times was so frequent and
ordinary that it stirred no particular feelings.
    The image was fading already, and for a moment that lasted I don’t
know how long I forgot about the Station, the experiment, Harey, the
black ocean, everything; I was filled with an instantaneous certainty
that those two men, who were no longer with us, infinitely small and
turned to dust, had been equal to anything they had encountered, and
the calm that resulted from this realization annihilated the formless
crowd surrounding the arena in mute expectation of my defeat. Along
with a double click of the apparatus being turned off, the artificial
light exploded into my eyes. I squinted. Sartorius was gazing at me
inquiringly, still in the same pose; Snaut, his back to the other man,
was busy with the equipment, seemingly deliberately clattering the
clogs he wore loosely on his feet.
    “Do you think it was successful, Dr. Kelvin?” Sartorius asked, his
repulsive nasal voice breaking off.
    “Yes,” I said.
    “Are you sure?” Sartorius responded with a hint of surprise or
even suspicion.
    “Yes.”
    The certainty and brusqueness of my reply temporarily threw him
off balance with his stiff solemnity.
    “Oh. . . Very well. . . ,” he mumbled, and looked around as if he
didn’t know what to do now. Snaut came up to my chair and started
unwinding the bandage.
    I got up and walked around the room; in the meantime Sartorius,
who had disappeared into the darkroom, came out with the film
already developed and dried. The wavering lines with their whitish
zigzags covered several yards of tape, like some kind of mold or
cobweb extending along the shiny black ribbon of celluloid.
    I no longer had anything to do, but I didn’t leave. The other two
men had entered the tape into the oxidized head of the modulator;
Sartorius had taken a last look at the end of it, frowning mistrustfully,
as if he were attempting to decipher what was contained in those
shaky lines.
     The rest of the experiment was not to be seen. I only knew what
was happening when they stood at the instrument consoles by the
wall and turned on the appropriate apparatus. The current sprang
to life with a faint bass hum in the coil casing beneath the armored
floor, and then there were just the lights in the vertical glass tubes of
the indicators moving downwards to show that the great tube of the
X-ray cannon was dropping down the vertical shaft and coming to
rest in its open mouth. At this point the lights stopped at the lowest
levels of the scale and Snaut began to crank up the voltage till the
indicators, or more accurately the white bars that represented them,
fluttered and made a half-turn to the right. The noise of the current
was barely audible. Nothing was happening; the drums containing
the film revolved beneath their cover so even that was out of sight,
and the footage counter ticked softly like the workings of a clock.
     Harey gazed now at me, now at them, from over her book. I went
up to her. She gave me a quizzical look. The experiment was ending
now; Sartorius slowly approached the conical top of the machine.
     “Can we go?” Harey mouthed at me. I nodded. She got up. With-
out saying goodbye to anyone—I would have found it too ridiculous—
I walked past Sartorius.
     The high windows of the upper corridor were filled with a sunset
of exceptional beauty. It wasn’t the usual cheerless tumescent red, but
every possible shade of pink, beneath a luminous mist that seemed
sprinkled with the finest silver. The leaden, irregularly undulating
black of the ocean’s endless plain seemed to respond to this mild
aura with a spume that gave off a soft, dirty purple reflection. It was
only at its very zenith that the sky was fiercely ruddy.
     All at once I came to a halt in the middle of the downstairs
corridor. I couldn’t bear to think that once again we’d be stuck in our
cabin open to the ocean, like in a prison cell.
     “Harey,” I said, “you know. . . I wouldn’t mind swinging by the
library. Would that be OK. . . ?”
     “Sure, I’d be glad to. I could look for something to read,” she said,
with somewhat artificial animation.
     I sensed that since the day before there was an unfilled gulf be-
tween us and that I ought to show her a least a little warmth; but
I was overcome by complete apathy. I don’t know what would have
had to happen for me to be shaken out of it. We went back along
the corridor, then down a ramp to a small vestibule. Here there were
three doors, and between them flowers as if in display cabinets behind
crystal glass panes.
     The middle door, which led to the library, was lined on both sides
with bulging artificial leather which I tried not to touch as I went in.
Inside it was a little cooler in the large circular space under the pale
silver ceiling with its stylized suns.
     I ran my hand across the backs of the series of solaristic classics,
and I was about to take down the first volume of Giese, the one with
the engraving under tissue paper on the title page, when I unexpect-
edly found Gravinsky’s small-format book, which I’d overlooked the
previous time.
     I sat down on an upholstered chair. It was completely quiet. A
few feet away from me Harey was flipping through some book. I
could hear the faint rustle of the pages beneath her fingers. Gravin-
sky’s compendium, which was most often used in school as a simple
crib, was an alphabetically arranged collection of solaristic hypothe-
ses, from Abiological to Zoo-degenerative. The compiler, who I don’t
think had ever seen Solaris, had plowed through every monograph,
expedition logbook, fragmentary text and interim report; he’d even
found quotations in the works of planetologists who studied other
globes, and provided a catalogue that was somewhat terrifying in the
brevity of its formulations, since some of them veered into incon-
sequentiality, deprived of the subtle complexity of thought that had
accompanied their inception. Though in fact the whole, encyclopedic
in intention, had ended up rather having curiosity value only; the
book had been published twenty years before, and in the meantime
a mountain of new hypotheses had appeared, by now too numerous
to be contained in a single volume. I looked over the alphabetical
index of authors, which was like a list of the fallen—very few of
them were still alive, and I don’t think a single one was still active
in the field. This entire treasury of thought, branching off in every
direction, left the impression that one of the hypotheses simply had
to be correct, that it wasn’t possible reality should be entirely other
than the myriad propositions hurled at it. Gravinsky had prefaced the
whole with an introduction in which he divided the preceding almost
sixty years of Solaris studies into periods. In the first, dating from
the initial exploration of the planet, no one was really consciously
proposing hypotheses yet. At that time it was assumed, intuitively as
it were, on the basis of “common sense,” that the ocean was a life-
less chemical conglomerate, a monstrous mass of jelly covering the
globe, which produced extraordinary formations as a consequence
of its “quasi-volcanic” activity, and through self-generating automatic
processes stabilized its irregular orbit, just as a pendulum maintains
an unchanging plane once set in motion. True, only three years
later Magenon declared the living nature of the “gelatinous machine,”
though Gravinsky dated the period of biological hypotheses as begin-
ning only nine years afterwards, when Magenon’s previously isolated
notion began to gather more and more supporters. The subsequent
years abounded in theoretical models of the living ocean, all highly
complex and based on biomathematical analyses. The third period
involved the collapse of what had hitherto been largely monolithic
opinion on the part of scholars.
    A multiplicity of schools appeared, that often fought furiously with
one another. It was the time when Panmaller, Strobla, Freyhouss, le
Greuill, and Osipovich were active; Giese’s entire legacy was subject
to devastating critique. It was at that time there appeared the first
atlases, catalogues, stereoscopic photographs of asymmetriads, which
previously had been regarded as unexaminable—the turning-point
came with new remote-controlled mechanisms that were dispatched
into the stormy hearts of the giants, which threatened to explode at
any moment. At this point, in the margins of the raging discussions,
there began to appear isolated, scornfully ignored minimalistic hy-
potheses suggesting that even if the much-trumpeted “contact” with
a “rational monster” were not made, an examination of the harden-
ing mimoid cities and balloon-like mountains thrown up and subse-
quently swallowed by the ocean was still likely to produce valuable
chemical and physio-chemical knowledge and insights into the struc-
ture of giant molecules; but no one even engaged the proponents of
such ideas in debate. After all, it was a period that saw the appear-
ance of still current catalogues of typical metamorphoses, or Franck’s
bioplasmic theory of mimoids, which, though it was abandoned as
false, remained a magnificent example of intellectual panache and
logical construction.
    These “Gravinsky periods,” which lasted over thirty years in all,
were the naive youth, the impulsively optimistic romanticism, and fi-
nally the maturity of solaristics, marked by the first skeptical voices.
By the end of the first twenty-five years there were already heard—as
a return to the first colloidal-mechanistic theories—hypotheses that
were their late offspring, concerning the non-mental state of Solaris’
ocean. The entire search for signs of a conscious will, for a teleol-
ogy of processes, for activity motivated by the ocean’s inner needs,
was almost universally acknowledged to have been an aberration on
the part of a whole generation of researchers. A journalistic pas-
sion for refuting their assertions prepared the ground for the sober,
analytically oriented work, concentrating on the assiduous gathering
of facts, that was conducted by the group of Holden, Eonides, and
Stoliwa; it was a time of the rapid increase in number and size of
archives and microfilm collections, of expeditions lavishly equipped
with every possible device Earth had to offer: automatic recording
equipment, sensors, probes, you name it. In some years more than a
thousand people took part in the research at the same time; but while
the speed at which new material was amassed continued to grow, the
spirit that moved the scientists was waning, and there began a period
of decline, hard to pinpoint in time, for that still optimistic phase in
the exploration of Solaris.
    It was characterized above all by the great and courageous personalities—
sometimes in theoretical imagination, sometimes in negation—of peo-
ple such as Giese, Strobla, or Sevada; the last of these, who was also
the last of the great solaricists, perished in mysterious circumstances
in the vicinity of the planet’s south pole, having done something that
even first-timers never would. Before the eyes of a hundred observers
he flew his machine, which had been gliding low over the ocean, into
the heart of a rapido which was clearly moving out of his way. There
was talk of some kind of sudden incapacity, a loss of consciousness,
or a rudder defect; in reality, I believe it was the first suicide—the
first abrupt, overt explosion of despair.
     But not the last. Gravinsky’s volume, however, did not include
such information; I added dates, facts, and details from myself as I
studied the yellowed pages and tiny print of his book.
     In fact, those sorry attempts on one’s own life also came to a stop;
nor were there any more of the great characters. The recruitment
of scientists who are to devote themselves to a particular branch of
planetology is itself an unstudied phenomenon. People of outstanding
abilities and strength of character are born at more or less regular
intervals, so it’s only the matter of their selection that is uneven. Their
presence or absence in a particular field of inquiry can perhaps be
explained by the perspectives it opens up. Whatever one thinks about
the classic scholars of solaristics, no one can deny them greatness,
often genius. The best mathematicians and physicists, the leading
figures in biophysics, information theory, and electrophysiology, for
decades were drawn to the silent giant of Solaris. All at once, from
one year to the next the army of researchers was, as it were, deprived
of its generals. There remained a gray, nameless mass of patient fact-
gatherers, compilers, creators of experiments that were occasionally
designed with originality; but there were no more mass expeditions
on a global scale, or bold unifying theories.
     Solaristics seemed to be falling apart, and as a kind of accom-
paniment or parallel to its descent there was a flurry of hypotheses,
barely distinguishable from one another by second-order details, re-
volving around the degeneration, retardation, involution of the seas of
Solaris. From time to time more daring and intriguing conceptualiza-
tions emerged, but they all seemed to pass judgment on the ocean,
which came to be seen as the final stage of a development which long
ago, thousands of years back, had had its period of supreme organi-
zation and now, having survived only physically, was disintegrating
into a multitude of unnecessary, nonsensical agonal formations. So
these were monumental, centuries-long death throes—that was how
Solaris was perceived. Its extensors and mimoids were seen as tu-
morous growths; the processes that moved its huge fluid body were
examined for indications of chaos and anarchy, to the point that this
orientation became an obsession, and the entire scientific literature
of the following seven or eight years, though of course free of ex-
pressions explicitly indicating the feelings of its authors, nevertheless
was like one long barrage of insults—revenge taken by the gray lead-
erless masses of solaricists upon the unchangingly indifferent object
of their intensified research, which continued to pay no attention to
them whatsoever.
     I was familiar with the work of a number of European psychol-
ogists wrongly, I think, excluded from this collection of classic So-
lariana, whose only connection with the field was that for a lengthy
period they researched public opinion, collecting the most ordinary
views, the attitudes of non-specialists, and in this way demonstrated
the astonishingly close relationship between changes in such views
and processes simultaneously taking place among the ranks of schol-
ars.
     Changes also occurred within the coordinating group of the Plan-
etology Institute, where decisions were made concerning the material
support provided for research. These changes resulted in a grad-
ual but prolonged reduction in the budget of solaristic institutes and
centers, and in grants for teams traveling to the planet.
     Voices arguing for cutbacks in research mingled with speeches de-
manding more vigorous means; though no one may have gone further
than the administrative director of the Worldwide Cosmology Insti-
tute, who stubbornly maintained that the living ocean wasn’t ignoring
human beings, but rather it simply didn’t notice them, just as an ele-
phant fails to see the ants crawling across its back; in order to call its
attention to ourselves, then, what was needed were powerful stimuli
and gigantic machines operating at the level of the entire planet. One
amusing detail was the fact that, as the press mischievously pointed
out, such costly measures were being demanded by the director of the
Cosmology Institute, not the Institute of Planetology, which financed
the exploration of Solaris; this, then, was generosity with someone
else’s money.
     Subsequently, the confusion of hypotheses, the reviving of old
ones, the introduction of trivial changes rendering them more precise
or, on the contrary, more ambiguous—all this began to turn the field
of solaristics, which despite its breadth had been rather straightfor-
ward up to this point, into an ever more entangled labyrinth full of
blind alleys. In an atmosphere of general indifference, stagnation, and
discouragement, a second ocean of futile print seemed in time to be
accompanying the ocean of Solaris.
     About two years before I joined Gibarian’s workshop as a graduate
of the Institute, the Mett-Irving Foundation was founded. It offered
large prizes to anyone who found a way to utilize the energy of the
oceanic plasma to the benefit of human beings. This had already been
a temptation earlier, and spaceships had brought numerous consign-
ments of plasma to Earth. Long and patient work had been carried
out to find methods to conserve it, applying both high and low tem-
peratures, an artificial micro-atmosphere and micro-climate resem-
bling that of Solaris, preservative radiation, and a thousand chemical
recipes, all of which merely allowed us to observe a more or less slug-
gish process of decay which, it goes without saying, like everything
else was described multiple times in extreme detail in all its stages—
autolysis, maceration, primary or early liquefaction, secondary or late
liquefaction. A similar fate befell samples taken from the various
productions and formations of the plasma. They differed from one
another only in the path they took to the end, which constituted a
watery fluid attenuated by auto-fermentation, light as ash and gleam-
ing like metal. Its composition, proportion of elements, and chemical
formulas could be given by any solaricist at the drop of a hat.
     The absolute failure to keep any large or small portion of the mon-
ster alive, or at least in a state of suspended vegetation or hibernation,
away from its planetary organism, became the source of a belief (de-
veloped by the school of Meunier and Prorokh) that there was in fact
only one single mystery to solve, and that once we opened it with the
right interpretive key, everything would immediately be clear. . .
     In the search for this key, this philosopher’s stone of Solaris, time
and energy were expended by people who often had nothing to do
with science, and in solaristics’ fourth decade the numbers of mania-
cal impostors from outside the scientific community, zealots whose fa-
naticism exceeded that of their distant predecessors, like the prophets
of the “perpetuum mobile” or the “squaring of the circle”—their num-
bers, then, assumed the dimensions of an epidemic, actually alarming
many psychologists. After a few years, however, this passion died
down, and when I was preparing for my voyage to Solaris, both it and
the ocean that had inspired it had long disappeared from newspaper
headlines and from daily conversation.
     As I replaced Gravinsky’s volume on the shelf, next to it—since the
books were arranged alphabetically—I noticed, barely visible between
the thick tomes, a small pamphlet by Grattenstrom, one of the most
curious blooms of the solaristic literature. It was a work that, in the
struggle to understand the Non-Human, was directed against humans
themselves, against people, a kind of lampoon of our species, furious
in its mathematical coldness. It was written by a self-taught scholar
who had first published a series of outstanding contributions to cer-
tain highly specific and rather marginal branches of quantum physics.
In his most important and most extraordinary work, a mere dozen or
so pages long, he sought to demonstrate that even the most seem-
ingly abstract, sublimely theoretical, mathematicized achievements of
science have in reality moved only a step or two away from a prehis-
toric, coarsely sensory-based, anthropomorphic understanding of the
world around us. Grattenstrom examined the formulas of relativity
theory and of the theorem of force fields; he looked at parastatics and
the hypotheses of a unified cosmic field, in search of traces of the
human body – all that comes from and is a consequence of the exis-
tence of our senses, the structure of our organism, and the limitations
and weaknesses of humankind’s animal physiology. He reached the
conclusion that there cannot now, nor in the future could there ever
be, talk of “contact” between human beings and any non-humanoid
civilization. In this satire against the entire species the thinking ocean
is not mentioned once, but its presence, in the shape of a contemp-
tuously triumphal silence, could be sensed underlying virtually every
sentence. That was at any rate the impression I had had when I read
Grattenstrom’s pamphlet for the first time. This work was actually
more of a curio than a work of solaristics in the strict sense of the
term; it was included in the library of classics of the genre because
it had been placed there by Gibarian himself—who, as it happened,
had been the one who gave it me to read.
    With a strange feeling akin to respect I slipped the slim unbound
offprint back among the books on the shelf. I ran my fingertips
over the green and brown Almanac of Solaristics. Amid all the chaos
and helplessness we were embroiled in, it couldn’t be denied that
the experiences of the last few weeks had given us some certainty
on a couple of fundamental questions over which a sea of ink had
been spilled in recent years—debates that previously had been futile
because they were unresolvable.
    Someone fond of paradoxes and sufficiently stubborn could go on
doubting that the ocean was a living being. But it was impossible to
deny the existence of its mind, whatever could be understood by the
term. It had become quite clear that it was only too aware of our
presence above it. . . That statement alone disconfirmed the entire
expansive wing of solaristics that declared the ocean to be “a world
unto itself,” “a being unto itself,” deprived by a process of repeated
atrophy of its former sensory organs, such that it supposedly knew
nothing of the existence of external phenomena or objects, enclosed
in a vortex of gigantic currents of thought whose abode, cradle, and
creator were the depths spinning beneath their two suns.
    And more: we had learned it could synthesize artificially that
which we ourselves could not—our bodies—and even improve them
by introducing into their subatomic structure inconceivable changes
which probably had something to do with the purposes that drove it.
    It existed then, it lived, thought, acted; the possibility of reducing
the “Solaris problem” to nonsense or to zero, the belief that we were
not dealing with any Being, and by the same token that our loss was
not in fact any kind of loss—all this was gone for good. Whether
they liked it or not, human beings had to take cognizance of a neigh-
bor that, though it was billions of miles away across the void and
separated from us by entire light years, still lay in the path of their
expansion, and was harder to grasp than the whole of the rest of the
Universe.
    We may be at the turning point of all history, I thought to myself.
A decision to give up, turn back, either now or in the near future,
could prevail; I no longer regarded even the closing down of the
Station as improbable, or at least beyond the bounds of possibility.
But I didn’t believe that anything could be saved in this way. The
very existence of the thinking colossus would never let people abide
in peace again. However much they traveled across the Galaxy and
made contact with civilizations of other beings similar to us, Solaris
would present a perpetual challenge to humankind.
     One other small leather-bound volume had found its way among
the yearbooks of the Almanac. I gazed for a moment at the cover,
darkened from the touch of fingers, before I opened it. It was an old
book, the Introduction to Solaristics by Muntius. I was remembering
the night I spent poring over it, and Gibarian’s smile when he gave
me his copy, and the terrestrial dawn in the window as I reached
the words “The End.” Solaristics, wrote Muntius, is a substitute for
religion in the space age. It is faith wrapped in the cloak of science;
contact, the goal for which we are striving, is as vague and obscure as
communion with the saints or the coming of the Messiah. Exploration
is a liturgy couched in methodological formulas; the humble work of
researchers is the expectation of consummation, of Annunciation, for
there are not nor can there be any bridges between Solaris and Earth.
This obvious fact, like many others—the absence of shared experi-
ences, the absence of conveyable concepts—was rejected by solari-
cists, the same way the faithful reject arguments that would subvert
the underpinnings of their faith. Besides, what do people expect,
what can they want from “informational communication” with think-
ing seas? A recording of experiences of a being that endures through
time, and is so old it probably cannot remember its own beginning?
A description of the desires, passions, hopes and sufferings, that are
released in the instantaneous birth of living mountains, the transfor-
mation of mathematics into existence, of loneliness and resignation
into plenitude? Yet all this constitutes uncommunicable knowledge,
and if one attempts to translate it into any terrestrial language, all
those sought-after values and significations are lost, they remain on
the far side. Besides, it isn’t these sorts of revelations, more worthy
of poetry than science, that are hoped for by the “believers,” oh no;
though they themselves are unaware of it, what they are waiting for is
a Revelation that would explain to them the meaning of humankind
itself! Solaristics, then, is the posthumous child of long-dead myths,
the final flower of mystical yearnings that people no longer have the
courage to utter aloud; while the cornerstone hidden deep in the
foundations of this edifice is the hope of Redemption. . .
     But, incapable of admitting that this is truly the case, solaricists
scrupulously avoid all commentary on Contact, such that in their
writings it becomes something ultimate—and while in its initial, still
sober sense it was supposed to be a beginning, an introduction, an
entry point onto a new path, one of many, it became beatified, and
after the passage of years it turned into their eternity and their heaven.
. .
     Straightforward and bitter is the analysis offered by Muntius, that
“heretic” of planetology; dazzling in its negation, in shattering the
myth of Solaris, or rather of the Human Mission. That first voice,
which dared to speak out as solaristics was still a developing field
imbued with confidence and romanticism, was greeted with complete
disregard and silence—something only too understandable, since ac-
cepting Muntius’s words would have been tantamount to erasing so-
laristics completely as it had existed thus far. The beginnings of a dif-
ferent, dispassionate, modest solaristics waited in vain for a founder.
Five years after Muntius died, by which time his book had become
a bibliographic rarity, a collector’s item not be found either in any
solaristic series or in philosophy libraries, a school named after him
arose—a Norwegian circle in which the composure of his exposition,
divided among the different characters of the thinkers assuming his
legacy, turned into the caustic, pigheaded sarcasm of Erle Ennesson,
and in a somewhat trivialized version, the “utilitarian” solaristics of
Phaelanga; the latter called for a focus on the concrete benefits to be
gained from research, without becoming distracted by the daydreams
and false hopes of civilizational contact and intellectual communion
between two civilizations. Yet next to Muntius’s pitiless analysis, the
writings of all his intellectual disciples are little more than footnotery,
if not garden variety popularization, with the exception of the works
of Ennesson and possibly Takata. Muntius himself had essentially ac-
complished everything, labeling the first phase of solaristics the “pe-
riod of the prophets,” among whom he included Giese, Holden, and
Sevada; the second phase he called “the great schism”—the splitting
of the one solarian Church into a clutch of warring denominations;
and he predicted a third phase—one of dogmatism and scholastic fos-
silization which would set in when everything there was to research
had already been researched. This, however, did not happen. I be-
lieve Gibarian was correct after all in seeing Muntius’s scorched-earth
exposition as a massive over-simplification that disregarded anything
in solaristics that ran contrary to the elements of faith; for in reality
what predominated in the field was unceasingly mundane research
that promised nothing beyond a material globe orbiting around two
suns.
     Inside Muntius’s book there was a faded offprint from the jour-
nal Parerga Solariana, folded in two. It was one of the first papers
Gibarian had written, before he became director of the Institute. After
the title—“Why I Am a Solaricist”—there followed a list, concise as a
precis almost, of the specific phenomena that justified the real possi-
bility of Contact. For Gibarian belonged to what may well have been
the last generation of researchers who had the courage to refer back
to the glory days of optimism and were not averse to their own kind
of faith, which went beyond the boundaries laid down by science, yet
was eminently material, since it believed their efforts would succeed
so long as those efforts were sufficiently persistent and unceasing.
     He was trained in the well-known, classic bioelectronic line of
research of the Eurasian school, which included Cho-En-Min, Ngyalla,
and Kavakadze. This work had demonstrated similarities between im-
ages of the electrical functioning of the brain and certain discharges
that occurred within the plasma preceding the appearance of some
of its formations, including early-stage Polymorpha and geminate So-
larids. He rejected overly anthropomorphic interpretations, all those
mystical notions of the psychoanalytic, psychiatric, and neurophysi-
ological schools, which sought to attribute to the neurogliac ocean
particular human ailments such as epilepsy (the analogue of which
were supposedly the convulsive eruptions of asymmetriads), because
among the advocates of Contact he was one of the most cautious
and clear-headed, and could not abide anything so much as the sen-
sationalism which, admittedly very infrequently, accompanied one or
another discovery. As it happened, a wave of exactly this kind of
cheap interest was provoked by my doctoral dissertation. That was
here too, though of course not in printed form—it was buried in one
of the microfilm capsules. In it, taking as my starting point the in-
novative research of Bergmann and Reynolds, who from the mosaic
of cortical processes had succeeded in identifying and “filtering out”
the components accompanying the most powerful emotions—despair,
pain, joy—I went on to juxtapose those recordings with discharges
emitted by currents in the ocean, and discovered oscillations and pat-
terns in the curves (in certain parts of the symmetriads’ canopy, at the
base of immature mimoids, and elsewhere) that offered a noteworthy
analogy. This was enough for my name to appear soon afterwards in
the gutter press beneath ludicrous headlines along the lines of “De-
spair of the Jelly” or “Planetary Orgasm.” But this worked out to my
advantage (or so I thought till recently), since I came to the attention
of Gibarian who, like any other solaricist, did not read every one of
the thousands of papers being published, especially those written by
novices. He wrote me a letter. That letter closed one chapter of my
life, and opened up a new one.
