After six days, no reaction having occurred, we decided to repeat the experiment. Immobilized until then at the intersection of the forty-third parallel and the one hundred and sixteenth meridian, the Station moved south, hovering at a constant altitude of four hundred meters above the ocean; our radars, indeed, as well as the radiograms of the satelloid, signaled a resurgence of plasma activity in the southern hemisphere. For forty-eight hours, an invisible beam of X-rays modulated by my encephalogram struck, at regular intervals, the almost smooth surface of the ocean. At the end of these forty-eight hours of travel, we had reached the outskirts of the polar region. The disc of the blue sun descended on one side of the horizon, and already on the opposite side the purple bulges of the clouds announced the red sunrise. In the sky, blinding flames, sheaves of green sparks struggled with muffled purple lights; the ocean itself took part in this combat of two stars, of two balls of fire, set ablaze here with mercurial reflections and there with scarlet reflections; the smallest cloud passing in the firmament enriched with iridescent shimmers the brilliance of the foam on the slope of the waves. The blue sun had just disappeared when, at the edge of the sky and the ocean, there suddenly appeared, barely distinct, drowned in the bloody mists – but immediately signaled by the detectors – a gigantic glass flower, a symmetry. The Station did not alter its course; after a quarter of an hour, the colossal ruby quivering with dying gleams was again concealed behind the horizon. A few minutes later, a thin column, whose base remained hidden from our eyes by the curvature of the planet, rose a few thousand meters into the atmosphere. This fantastic tree which continued to grow, dripping with blood and mercury, signified the end of symmetry; the proliferation of branches, at the top of the column, melted into an enormous mushroom simultaneously lit by the two suns and which flew away with the wind; the lower part, swollen, decomposed in heavy clusters and sank slowly. The agony of symmetry lasted a full hour. Another forty-eight hours passed. Our rays had swept across a wide expanse of ocean; one last time, we repeated the experiment. From our vantage point we could distinctly see, three hundred kilometers to the south, a chain of Arrhenids, six rocky summits, covered with a material like snow; in reality, they were deposits of organic origin, proving that this mountainous formation had once been the bottom of the ocean. We then headed southwest. For some time we skirted the mountain range, crowned with the clouds that gathered during the red day; then the clouds disappeared. Ten days had passed since the first experiment. In the Station, apparently, not much was going on. Sartorius had set the program for the experiment, which an automatic installation repeated at fixed intervals – I didn&#39;t even know if anyone was checking the correct operation of the installation. In reality, the calm was not as complete as it seemed – but not due to human activities. I feared that Sartorius intended to finish building the Annihilator. And how would Snaut react, when he learned that I had deceived him to some extent, that I had exaggerated the dangers to which one exposed oneself in attempting to annihilate neutrinic matter? Neither of them, however, spoke to me about this project anymore and I wondered about the reasons for their silence. I vaguely suspected them of cunning and concealment – perhaps they had undertaken work in secret? Every day I would peek into the room where the Annihilator was located, a windowless room located directly below the main lab. I never met anyone in that room; the layer of dust covering the frame and the cables of the apparatus testified that one had not touched this one for weeks. Besides, I didn&#39;t meet anyone anywhere and I couldn&#39;t reach Snaut anymore; when I tried to call the radio booth, no one answered the phone. Someone must have been directing the Station&#39;s movements, but who? I didn&#39;t know and, strange as it may seem, I considered that the question did not concern me. The absence of reactions from the ocean also left me indifferent; so much so that, after two or three days, I had ceased to hope for them or to apprehend them; I had completely forgotten about the experience and the possible reactions. I remained seated for whole days, either in the library or in my cabin; Harey, a discreet shadow, kept me company. I felt that a malaise remained between us and that my apathy, this state of respite outside of thought, could not stretch to infinity. Obviously, it was up to me to take the initiative, it was up to me to change our relationship. But I rejected the very idea of any change whatsoever; I was unable to make any decision. I had the feeling that everything inside the Station, and in particular my relationship with Harey, had the fragility of an unstable scaffolding – that the slightest modification could upset this perilous balance and precipitate ruin. Where did this feeling come from? I didn&#39;t know. The strangest thing is that she, too, somehow had a similar feeling. When, today, I relive these moments, I am convinced that this feeling of uncertainty, of respite, this presentiment of an imminent cataclysm were caused by an invisible presence, which had taken possession of the Station. Presence which I think I can affirm was also manifested in dreams. Having never had such visions before or since, I decided to write them down, to transcribe them approximately, insofar as my vocabulary allows me to relate them, it being understood that it is not there are only fragmentary glimpses, almost entirely stripped of an intransmissible horror. In an indistinct region, in the heart of immensity, far from heaven and earth, no ground under my feet, no vault above my head, no walls, nothing, I am a prisoner of a foreign matter, my body is coated with a dead, formless substance; or rather, I no longer have a body, I am this matter foreign to myself. Nebulous spots, of a pale pink, surround me, suspended in a medium more opaque than the air, for the objects become distinct only when they are very close to me; but then, when the objects come closer, they have an extraordinary clearness, they impose themselves on me with a supernatural precision; the reality of everything around me now has an incomparable power of material evidence. (As I wake up, I have the paradoxical feeling that this is the waking state I&#39;ve just left, and everything I see after I open my eyes seems hazy and unreal.) So begins the dream . Something around me awaits my consent, my agreement, an inner acquiescence, and I know, or rather something within me knows that I should not give in to an unknown temptation, for the more promising the silence seems, the more terrible will be the end. Or, more exactly, I don&#39;t know any such thing, because if I knew, I would be afraid, and I never felt any fear. I wait. From the pink mist that envelops me, an invisible object emerges and touches me. Inert, imprisoned in this foreign matter that surrounds me, I can neither step back nor turn around, and this invisible object continues to touch me, to examine my prison, and I feel this contact like that of a hand, and this hand recreates me. Until now, I thought I saw, but I had no eyes, and now I have eyes! Under the fingers caressing me with a hesitant movement, my lips, my cheeks come out of nothingness, and the caress extending, I have a face, the breath swells my chest, I exist. And recreated, I create in my turn, and before me appears a face that I have never seen before, both unknown and known. I try to meet the eyes in front of me, but that is impossible for me, because I cannot impose any direction on my gaze, and we mutually discover each other, beyond all will, in a collected silence. I came alive again, I feel unlimited strength and this creature – a woman? – stay with me, and we remain motionless. Our hearts beat, confused, and suddenly from the void that surrounds us, where nothing exists and can exist, an &quot;influence&quot; of indefinable, inconceivable cruelty insinuates itself. The caress which created us, which enveloped us in a golden mantle, becomes the tingling of an infinity of fingers. Our bodies, white and naked, dissolve, turn into a swarm of black vermin, and I am – we are – a mass of sticky, intertwined worms, an endless, infinite mass, and in this infinity, no! I am infinity, and I scream silently, I crave death, I crave an end. But, simultaneously, I scatter in all directions, and the pain swells in me, a pain more acute than any pain experienced in the waking state, a pain multiplied, a sword searching the black and red distances , a rock-hard and growing pain, a mountain of pain visible in the bright light of another world. This is one of the simplest dreams; I cannot relate the others, for lack of words to express their horror. In these dreams, I was unaware of Harey&#39;s existence, nor could I find any trace of recent or ancient events. There were also dreams without &quot;images&quot;. In a motionless darkness, a &quot;coagulated&quot; shadow, I feel that someone is auscultating me, slowly, minutely, but no instrument, no hand touches me. Yet I feel penetrated through and through, I crumble, I disintegrate, there is only emptiness, and total annihilation is followed by a terror, the mere memory of which is enough today to precipitate the beats of my heart. And the days followed one another, dull, always similar; I was indifferent to everything; I feared only the night and I did not know how to escape the dreams. Harey never slept; stretched out beside her, I fled from sleep; I held her in my arms, I kissed her, I cajoled her; tenderness was only a pretext, a means of postponing the moment when I would fall asleep… I had not spoken to Harey about these horrible nightmares, but she must have guessed something, because her attitude betrayed an involuntary feeling of deep humiliation. As I said, I had not seen Snaut or Sartorius for a long time. Snaut, however, occasionally gave me signs of life; he left a ticket at my door, or called me by telephone. He then asked me if I had noticed any new phenomenon, any change, anything that could be interpreted as a reaction to the experience repeated so many times. I answered him negatively and returned the question to him; at the back of the small screen, Snaut was just shaking his head. On the fifteenth day after the experiments stopped, I woke up earlier than usual; the nightmare of the night had exhausted me and I felt a numbness in all my limbs, as if I had remained for long hours under the effect of a powerful narcosis. The first rays of the red sun illuminated the window; a river of purple flames flowed over the surface of the ocean and I noticed that this immense expanse, which no movement had disturbed the previous days, was beginning to stir. And suddenly a thin veil of mist covered the black ocean; but this pale haze seemed to have a very palpable consistency. Here and there a tremor shook the mist; then, gradually, the vibration spread in all directions to the horizon. The black ocean then disappeared completely beneath thick rolling membranes, with rosy bulges and depressions of pearly shadow. These strange waves, suspended above the ocean, suddenly merged into a tumult and there was nothing more than a mass of glaucous foam with large bubbles, which a storm raised furiously up to the height of the station ; and all around immense membranous wings, without any resemblance to clouds, soared into the red sky. Some of these wings of foam, which completely veiled the sun, seemed carbonaceous; others, exposed at an angle to the light, had cherry or amaranth shades. And the phenomenon continued, as if the ocean were in the process of shedding, throwing off an old scaly skin; at times the black surface of the ocean gleamed in an opening, immediately covered with foam. Wings of foam hovered close to me, a few yards from the window; one of them, a silky scarf, rubbed the window. And, while the ocean continued to spawn these bizarre birds, the first swarms dissipated high in the sky and broke up at the zenith into transparent filaments. The Station remained immobilized as long as the spectacle lasted, approximately three hours, that is to say until nightfall. And even after the sun was gone, when the shadows already covered the ocean, you could still see myriads of jagged wings glowing red, sinking into the sky, hovering in serried ranks, climbing effortlessly, sucked up towards the firmament . The phenomenon had appalled Harey, but it was no less disconcerting to me; its novelty should not have disturbed me, since the solarists observed two or three times a year – and even more often, when luck favored them – forms and creations that no repertoire had previously described. The following night, an hour before the blue sunrise, we witnessed another phenomenon: the ocean was becoming phosphorescent. Patches of gray light swayed to the rhythm of the invisible waves. These spots, at first isolated, quickly spread out, joined together; and soon a carpet of spectral light spread out as far as the eye could see. The intensity of the light gradually increased for about fifteen minutes; then the phenomenon ended surprisingly. From the west came a blanket of shadow, advancing a breadth of several hundred miles; when this moving shadow had passed the Station, the phosphorescent part of the ocean, receding towards the east, seemed to flee from the gigantic extinguisher; it was like a routed dawn, pushed back to the horizon, surrounded by a final halo; and the night triumphed. A little later, the sun rose above the desert ocean, rippled by a few frozen waves, whose mercurial reflections came to hit my window. The phosphorescence of the ocean was a listed phenomenon, which was sometimes observed before the eruption of an asymmetry, and which in any case meant a local amplification of the activity of the plasma. However, for the next two weeks, nothing happened either outside or inside the Station. Once, however, in the middle of the night, I heard a powerful cry, a superhuman cry, sharp and prolonged. Awakened from a nightmare, I first thought that another dream had succeeded the previous one. Before falling asleep, I had heard muffled noises coming from the laboratory, part of which was located above my cabin; it seemed to me that we were moving heavy objects, large appliances. And when I knew that I was not dreaming, I judged that this cry also came from above, but how could such a shrill cry pierce a soundproof ceiling? The excruciating howl lasted almost half an hour. Dripping with sweat, my nerves raw, I was about to make up my mind to go upstairs, when the cry stopped; and again I heard the muffled, distant sliding of heavy objects dragged along the ground. Two days later, while I was having dinner with Harey, Snaut walked into the small kitchen. He had dressed, as one dresses on Earth after a day&#39;s work, and this new costume changed him. He looked taller, and also older. Without looking at us, he approached the table; he did not sit down, opened a can of meat and began to eat, swallowing a mouthful of bread between two mouthfuls of cold meat. The sleeve of his jacket brushed the edge of the box and was stained with grease. I said to him: - Watch out for your sleeve! Mouth full, he growled, “Huh? Then he continued to gulp down the food, as if he hadn&#39;t eaten anything in days. He filled a glass of wine, emptied it in one gulp, sighed and rubbed his lips. With his bloodshot eyes, he looked at me and muttered, “You don&#39;t shave anymore? Ah, ah… Harey piled the dishes in the sink. Snaut rocked on his heels; he grimaced and sucked noisily on his teeth. I had the impression that he exaggerated this noise for pleasure. He looked at me insistently: - Have you decided not to shave? – I did not answer. – Believe me, he added, you are wrong! He, too, had begun by not shaving ... - Go to bed! - What ? I want to chat a little. Listen, Kelvin, maybe he wants us well… He might want to please us, but he doesn&#39;t know exactly how to go about it. It deciphers desires in our brains, and only two percent of nervous processes are conscious. Therefore, he knows us better than we know ourselves. You have to get along with him. You listen to me ? You do not want ? Why – he was tearing – why don&#39;t you shave? - Shut up! ... you&#39;re drunk. &quot;Drunk, me?&quot; So what ! Because I drag my hump from one end of space to the other and I snoop around the cosmos, am I not allowed to get drunk? Why ? You believe in the mission of man, huh, Kelvin? Gibarian told me about you, before letting his beard grow… He described you very well… Above all, don&#39;t go into the laboratory, you would lose faith there. The laboratory is the domain of Sartorius, our reverse Faust1… He is looking for a remedy against immortality! He&#39;s the last Knight of the Holy Contact, the man we need… His most recent find, too, wasn&#39;t bad – prolonged agony. Not bad huh ? Agonia perpetuated…straw…straw hats…and you don&#39;t drink, Kelvin? He lifted his swollen eyelids and looked at Harey; motionless, she stood leaning against the wall. Snaut began to declaim: “O, white Aphrodite, born of the Ocean, your divine hand…” – He choked out laughing. “It sticks, huh, Kel…wine…” A fit of coughing prevented him from continuing. Calm, with a cold rage, I gritted: &#39;Shut up! Shut up and go! &quot;Are you chasing me?&quot; You also ? You don&#39;t shave anymore and you chase me away! You don&#39;t want my warnings anymore, you don&#39;t want my advice anymore? Between interstellar companions, it takes 1 In French in the text. help each other! Look, Kelvin, we&#39;re going down, open the windows, and we&#39;re going to call him! He may hear us. But what is his name? We have given a name to all the stars, to all the planets, when perhaps they already had a name… What nerve on our part! Come on, let&#39;s go down! We&#39;re going to shout, we&#39;ll explain to him the trick he&#39;s played on us so well, that he&#39;ll be very moved... he&#39;ll build us silver symetriads, he&#39;ll raise his mathematical prayers to us, he&#39;ll send us angels the color of blood. He will share our sorrows and our terrors, and he will beg us to help him die. He is already begging us, he is imploring us… by each of his manifestations, he is begging us to help him die. Aren&#39;t you smiling? But you know I&#39;m kidding! If the man had a more pronounced sense of humor, things might have turned out differently. Do you know what he wants to do? He wants to punish this ocean, he wants to make it howl from all its mountains at once... Do you think he won&#39;t have the courage to submit his plan to the ossified Areopagus who sent us here? , as redeemers of sins that are foreign to us? You&#39;re right… He&#39;s scared. But he&#39;s only afraid of the little hat. He won&#39;t show the little hat to anyone, he won&#39;t have the courage, our Faust… I was silent. Snaut swayed more and more violently. Tears streamed down her cheeks and fell onto her clothes. He continued: &quot;Who is responsible?&quot; Who is responsible for this situation? Gibarian? Giese? Einstein? Plato? All criminals... Just think, in a rocket, man risks bursting like a bubble, or becoming petrified, or burning out, or sweating all his blood in one go, without having had time to shout, and all that remains are the ossicles which whirl between the armored walls, according to Newton&#39;s laws corrected by Einstein, these rattles of our progress! With a good heart, we followed the superb road, and here we are arrived… Contemplate our success, Kelvin, contemplate our cells, these unbreakable plates, these immortal sinks, this cohort of faithful cupboards, these dedicated cupboards! If I wasn&#39;t drunk, I wouldn&#39;t talk like that, but eventually someone had to talk. Should someone speak? You sit there, like a child in the middle of the slaughterhouse, and you let your beard grow… Whose fault is it? Find the answer yourself! He turned slowly and left; on the threshold, he clung to the doorpost, so as not to fall. And now his footsteps echoed down the hall. I avoided looking at Harey; but, in spite of myself, I suddenly met his eyes. I wanted to get up, take her in my arms, stroke her hair. I did not move.