I was lying on my back, Harey&#39;s head in the crook of my shoulder; I thought of nothing. The darkness was peopled. I heard footsteps. Something was piling up above me, higher and higher, ad infinitum. The night, the night pierced me through and through, the night took possession of me, it enveloped me and penetrated me, impalpable, inconsistent. Petrified, I couldn&#39;t breathe, there was no air to breathe. Far away, I could hear my heart beating. I gathered the rest of my strength, all my attention, and waited for the agony. I was waiting… I was shrinking, and the invisible sky, without horizon, shapeless space, without clouds, without stars, receded, extended and grew around me. I tried to crawl onto my bed, but there was no bed, the darkness no longer covered anything. I pressed my hands against my face. I had no more fingers, no more hands. I wanted to scream, howl… The room floated in a blue half-light, which surrounded the furniture, the shelves loaded with books, which erased the color of the walls and of any object. A pearly whiteness irradiated the window. I was drenched in sweat. I glanced sideways. Harey looked at me. She raised her head: &#39;Do you have a numb arm?&#39; The color of his eyes had also been erased; they were gray – luminous, though, under the black eyelashes. - What ? – I felt his whisper like a caress, before understanding the meaning of the words. - No. Oh yes ! I say finally. I put my hand on his shoulder; I had tingling in my fingers. She asked: &quot;Did you have a bad dream?&quot; I drew him with the other hand: — A dream? Yes, I was dreaming. And you, haven&#39;t you slept? - I do not know. I do not believe. I&#39;m not sleepy. It must not prevent you from sleeping… Why are you looking at me like that? I closed my eyes. His heart was beating against my heart. His heart ? Just an accessory! I tell myself. But nothing surprised me anymore, not even my own indifference. I had crossed the boundaries of fear and despair. I had come so far – no one had ever come so far! My lips brushed her neck; I descended lower, to the cavity between the tendons; the blood pounded the shell wall of silken flesh. I leaned on my elbow. Dawn, sweetness of dawn? A silent storm set the cloudless horizon ablaze. A flash, the first ray of the blue sun, crossed the room and broke into sharp reflections; there was a crossfire of sparks, spurting from the mirror, the doorknobs, the nickel-plated pipes; the light scattered, threw itself on any smooth surface and seemed to want to conquer a larger space, to burst the room. I looked at Harey; the pupil of his gray eyes had contracted. She asked in a dull voice: &quot;Is the night already over?&quot; “Here, the night never lasts long. - And U.S ? - What us? &quot;We&#39;ll stay here long?&quot; Coming from him, the question was not lacking in comic flavor; but, when I spoke, my voice revealed no trace of gaiety. &#39;Long enough, probably. Don&#39;t you want to stay? She didn&#39;t blink. She looked at me carefully. Had she blinked now? I wasn&#39;t sure. She pulled back the blanket and I saw the little pink triangle on her arm. &quot;Why are you looking at me like that?&quot; - Because you are very pretty. She smiles, without malice; she thanked me discreetly for my compliment. - Truly ? It seems like…it&#39;s like…” “What? “Like you doubted something. - What an idea ! - As if you were suspicious of me, as if I had hidden something ... - Absurd! - In your way of denying, I can see that I&#39;m not mistaken. The light became blinding. Hand in visor, I looked for my glasses. They were on the table. I knelt down, stretched out my arm and put on the black glasses. When I lay down next to her, Harey smiled. &quot;And me?&quot; I suddenly understood: - Glasses? I got up and started poking around; I opened drawers; I moved books, instruments… I found two pairs of glasses, which I gave to Harey. She tried them on, one pair after another. The glasses were too big; they fell to the middle of his nose. Creaking, the shutters slid in front of the window. And it was night again. Groping, I helped Harey remove his glasses and put our glasses under the bed. She asked: &quot;What are we doing?&quot; - At night, we sleep! &quot;Kris...&quot; &quot;What?&quot; &quot;Do you want a compress on your forehead?&quot; - No thanks. Thank you darling. I don&#39;t know why I added those two words. In the darkness, I grasped her graceful shoulders, felt them quiver, and felt sure I was holding Harey in my arms. Or rather, I suddenly realized that she wasn&#39;t trying to trick me; it was me who was cheating on her – because she honestly thought she was Harey. I then dozed off several times, and each time an anguished start roused me from sleep. Panting, exhausted, I pressed myself against her; my heart was slowly calming down. With her fingertips, she cautiously touched my cheeks, my forehead, to check if I had a fever. It was Harey. The one, real Harey. Something changed in me; I stopped struggling and almost immediately fell asleep. A feeling of pleasant freshness woke me up. I had my face covered with a damp cloth, which I removed easily; I saw Harey leaning over me. She smiles at me. With both hands she squeezed a piece of gauze, which dripped into a porcelain basin; next to the basin was a bottle of healing lotion. &quot;What sleep!&quot; she said, applying to my temple the compress she had just prepared. - You are hurt ? - No. I frowned; the skin had regained its suppleness. Harey was sitting on the edge of the bed, her dark hair tossed over the collar of a bathrobe, a man&#39;s bathrobe, striped orange and white, the sleeves of which she had rolled up to the elbow. I was terribly hungry; twenty hours, at least, had passed since my last meal. When Harey had finished nursing, I got up. My gaze fell on two dresses, which draped the back of an armchair – two absolutely identical white dresses, each adorned with a row of red buttons. I had torn one of those dresses myself, to help Harey out of it. And Harey came back last night wearing the second dress! She followed my gaze: &#39;I had to undo the seam with scissors,&#39; she said. I think the zipper got stuck. The sight of these two identical dresses exceeded in horror anything I had known before. Harey was busy putting the little pharmacy in order. I turned away and bit my fist. Continuing to stare at these two dresses – or rather this one and only split dress – I walked towards the door. Water flowed noisily from the faucet. I opened the door, slipped out of the room, and carefully closed the panel. I heard the murmur of water, the clink of bottles; suddenly all noise ceased. Jaws clenched, I waited; the panel of the door reflected one of the luminous tubes which surrounded the ceiling of the rotunda. I held the doorknob, unconvinced that I could keep it up. A sudden jolt nearly snatched it from my hand; but the door did not open; it vibrated and began to shake up and down. Stunned, I let go of the handle and stepped back. The plastic panel was hollowing out, as if an invisible figure next to me had tried to break down the door to enter the room! The panel&#39;s steel frame was bowing more and more and the enamel coating was crumbling. Suddenly it dawned on me: instead of pushing the door, which opened outward, Harey was trying to pull it open. The reflection of the luminous tube curved in the distorting mirror of the white panel; a powerful crack sounded and the panel, stretched to the extreme, split. Simultaneously, the hilt disappeared, torn from its mount. Bloody hands slipped through the crack, moved forward, leaving red marks on the milky varnish, and the door shattered into two pieces hanging at an angle from their hinges. A livid face appeared; a haggard creature, dressed in an orange and white bathrobe, rushed to my chest, sobbing. I wanted to flee, too late and against all hope; but I was unable to move. Harey was breathing heavily; his disheveled head hammered my shoulder. When I could reach out to control her, Harey collapsed. Avoiding the shattered panel, I carried her inside the bedroom and laid her on the bed. On the tips of his scratched fingers, the nails were broken. When she turned her hand over, I saw the bones of her palm protrude bare. I looked at his face; the eyes, devoid of expression, did not see me. &quot;Harey!&quot; She responded with an inarticulate grunt. I put a finger to his eye; the eyelid closed. I headed for the pharmacy. The bed creaked; I turned around; Harey sat staring in horror at her bloody hands. “Kris,” she moaned, “I…I…what happened to me? I replied curtly: &quot;You hurt yourself tearing down the door.&quot; My lips itched weirdly, especially my lower lip, which I pinned between my teeth. Harey stared at the dangling pieces of the plastic panel clinging to the steel frame for a moment, then looked back at me. She was trying to hide the terror that had invaded her, but I saw that her chin was trembling. I cut squares of gauze, took a jar of antiseptic powder and went back to the bed. The glass jar slipped from my hands and broke; but I no longer needed it. I lifted Harey&#39;s hand. The fingernails, still surrounded by a trickle of clotted blood, had grown back. A pink scar marked the hollow of the palm, and this scar was shrinking, fading visibly. I sat up, stroked his face, and tried to smile – without much success. &quot;Why did you do that, Harey?&quot; - It&#39;s me ? Her eyes pointed to the door. - Yes ... You do not remember? - No ... that is to say, I realized that you were no longer there, I was very scared, and ... - And what? - I looked for you, I thought you might be in the bathroom ... Only then did I notice that the sliding wardrobe, hiding the entrance to the bathroom, had been pushed back. - Next ? — I ran for the door. - After ? - I forgot ... something must have happened ... - What? - I do not know. &quot;What do you remember later?&quot; “I was sitting here on the bed. &quot;Don&#39;t you remember I carried you here?&quot; The corner of her lips sagging, her face worried, she hesitated: — It seems to me… it&#39;s possible… I don&#39;t know. She swung her legs over the edge of the bed, got up and walked towards the broken door. - Chris! Approaching behind her, I seized her by the shoulders; she was shaking. She suddenly turned around and whispered, “Kris, Kris…” “Calm down! &quot;Kris, if that&#39;s me…Kris, do I have epilepsy?&quot; Epilepsy – good God! she definitely had fun questions. - What an idea, my dear! The doors, you see, the doors here, they are strange doors… We left the room at the moment when the shutter of the window creaked up; the blue sun was sinking into the ocean. I led Harey to the small kitchen on the other side of the rotunda. Together we looted cupboards and refrigerators. I soon realized that Harey wasn&#39;t much better at cooking or opening tins than I was. I devoured the contents of two cans and drank countless cups of coffee. Harey also ate, as children sometimes eat, when they are not hungry and do not want to annoy their parents; or rather no, because she didn&#39;t force herself to eat; she absorbed the food automatically, with indifference. After the meal, we went into the operating room, adjoining the radio booth; I had my plan. I told Harey I wanted to have a medical check-up—a simple check-up on his general condition—and put him in a mechanical chair. I took a syringe and needles out of the sterilizer. I knew the place of each object; the instructors had neglected no detail, during the training course, inside the model of the Station. Harey held out his fingers to me; I took a drop of blood. I smeared the blood on a glass plate, which I placed at the bottom of the exhauster; then I introduced the wafer into a vacuum tank and I rained down a shower of silver ions. I felt better; the gestures of familiar work had a calming effect. Lying on the cushions of the mechanical chair, Harey gazed at the equipment in the operating room. The hum of the telephone fills the silence; I picked up the receiver. “Kelvin. I was watching Harey. She had remained impassive; she seemed exhausted from her recent adventure. I heard a sigh of relief: - Finally! It was Snaut. I waited, the receiver pressed to my ear. &quot;You have a &#39;visit&#39;, don&#39;t you?&quot; - Yes. - You are busy ? - Yes. - A little auscultation, huh? - Are you disturbed ? You wanted to play a game of chess? “Don&#39;t get upset, Kelvin! Sartorius wants to meet you, he would like the three of us to meet. Surprised, I replied: - Very kind of him! But… – I interrupted myself, then I continued: Is he alone? - No. I misspoke. He would like to speak with us. The three video-telephones will be connected to the same line; the image transmission lenses will be blocked. - Ah! Why didn&#39;t he call me himself? Am I intimidating her? &quot;Possibly,&quot; growled Snaut. So ? - A conference ... in an hour, it will? - Very well. I saw him on the screen – only the face, no bigger than the fist. For a moment he looked at me attentively; I heard the crackle of electric current. Then Sna ut spoke, with some hesitation: &quot;Are you managing?&quot; - Not too bad. And you? - A little worse than you, I guess ... Could I ... - Would you like to come to my house? Over my shoulder, I looked at Harey. She was stretched out, her legs crossed, her head tilted forward; with a gloomy face, she played mechanically with the little chrome ball that terminated a chain fixed to the armrest of the armchair. Snaut&#39;s voice rang out, &quot;Leave that, do you hear?&quot; I tell you to leave it! I saw his profile on the screen; I couldn&#39;t hear anything – he had covered the microphone with his hand – but his lips were moving. &quot;No, I can&#39;t come,&quot; he said quickly. May be later. Anyway, I&#39;ll call you in an hour. The screen went blank; I hung up the handset. - Who was it ? Harey asked, not showing any curiosity. “Snaut, a cybernetician… you don&#39;t know him. &quot;Will it last long?&quot; - You&#39;re bored ? I put the first plate of the series in the case of the neutrinic microscope and, one after the other, I pressed the switches of different colors; magnetic fields rumbled dully. &quot;There aren&#39;t many distractions here, and if my modest company isn&#39;t enough for you…&quot; I spoke absently, lengthening the intervals between words. I drew the big black helmet which flared around the telescope of the microscope towards me and I rested my forehead on the elastic foam of the visor. I heard Harey&#39;s voice, but I didn&#39;t understand what she was saying. My gaze overlooked, in an abrupt foreshortening, an enormous desert flooded with silvery light, dotted with rounded rocky plates – red blood cells – quivering and swaying behind a veil of mist. I focused the telescope and penetrated deeper into the fiery landscape. Without taking my eyes off the visor, I turned the orientation crank; when a shard of rock, an isolated globule, found itself at the crossroads of the black threads, I enlarged the image. The lens had apparently encountered a deformed erythrocyte, collapsed in the middle, its jagged edges casting sharp black shadows into the depths of a circular crater. The crater, bristling with deposits of silver ions, slipped out of the microscope&#39;s field of view. The nebulous outlines of albumen links, atrophied and distorted, appeared within an opalescent liquid. A serpentine of albumen folded up at the crossroads of the black threads of the lens; slowly, gradually, I operated the enlargement lever. From one moment to another, I was to arrive at the end of this exploration of the abysses; the shadow of a molecule occupied the entire space; then the image became blurry… Nothing however was shown. I should have seen the hectic cloud of atoms vibrating – I saw nothing. The screen blazed, immaculate. I pushed the lever all the way. The irritated snoring grew louder; I still couldn&#39;t see anything. An alarm signal sounded, repeated itself: the circuit was overloaded. One last time, I gazed out over the silvery wasteland and turned off the power. I looked at Harey. She gave a hint of a yawn, which she deftly changed into a smile. She asked: &quot;Am I in good health?&quot; — Excellent. You&#39;re doing very well... couldn&#39;t be better. I continued to stare at her and again felt a bug running through my bottom lip. What exactly had happened? What did that mean? This body, weak and fragile in appearance – indestructible in reality – did it finally turn out to be composed of nothing? I banged my fist on the cylinder of the microscope. A fault in the device? Wrong concentration of magnetic fields? No, I knew the device worked perfectly. I had gone through all the levels – the cells, the albumin conglomerates, the molecules – and everything was similar to what I had already observed on thousands of preparations. But the last step into matter had taken me nowhere. I tied Harvey; I took the blood from a middle vein and poured it into a graduated glass container. I then distribute it among several test tubes; I started the analyses. This work required more time than I had anticipated; I lacked a bit of practice. Reactions were normal, all reactions... I dropped a drop of frozen acid onto a coral bead. Smoke. The blood turned gray and covered with a layer of dirty foam. Disintegration, decomposition, further, further! I turned away to pick up a second test tube; when my eye returned to the experiment in progress, I nearly dropped the thin glass tube. Beneath the layer of dirty foam, a dark coral grew. The blood, destroyed by the acid, recreated itself. It was absurd, impossible! - Chris! “I heard my name from a great distance. - Kris, the phone! - What ? Oh yes thank you. The telephone had been ringing for a long time; I realized it only then. I picked up the receiver. “Kelvin. — Snaut. We are all three connected to the same line. Sartorius&#39; high-pitched voice echoed through the earpiece: “Hail, Dr. Kelvin! – The cautious voice, falsely assured, of the lecturer who has ventured onto a crumbling stage. I replied, &quot;My respects, Dr. Sartorius!&quot; I wanted to laugh; but I didn&#39;t know if I could allow myself to give in to a gaiety whose causes remained unclear. In the end, who was to be laughed at? I held in my hand a test tube containing blood. I shook her. The blood had coagulated. Perhaps, a few moments earlier, I had been the victim of an illusion? Maybe I was wrong? — I wanted to expose to you, dear colleagues, certain questions concerning the… the ghosts. I heard Sartorius and yet my mind refused to accept his words; Contemplating the coagulated blood at the bottom of the test tube, I defended myself against this voice which tried to force my attention. &quot;Let&#39;s call them F-creations,&quot; Snaut slipped quickly. “Ah, yes, very well. A vertical line, barely perceptible in the middle of the screen, indicated that I was connected to two channels; separated by this line, I should have seen two images – Snaut and Sartorius. But the screen, framed by a luminous border, remained dark. Both of my interlocutors had covered the lens of their camera. — Each of us has carried out various experiments. – Always the same caution in the nasal voice. A silence. &quot;I suggest first an exchange of acquired knowledge,&quot; continued Sartorius. I will venture, then, to communicate the conclusions to which I reached personally. If you would like to start, Dr. Kelvin…” “Me? I suddenly felt that Harey was looking at me. I put my hand on the table and rolled the test tube under the racks loaded with utensils. Then I perched on top of a high stool, which I had attracted with my foot. I was about to recuse myself, when, to my own astonishment, I heard myself reply: &quot;Good.&quot; A little chat? I haven&#39;t done much, but I can talk about it. A histological preparation and some reactions. Microreactions. I feel like… – I didn&#39;t know what to say. Suddenly, a valve opened and I resumed: Everything is normal, but it&#39;s a camouflage. A mask. In a certain sense, it is a supercopy, a superior reproduction of the original. Let me explain: whereas there exists, in man, a fundamental limit – an end to structural divisibility –, the frontiers here are pushed back. We are dealing with an infra-atomic framework! - One moment, one moment! Could you clarify your thought? asked Sartorius. Snaut said nothing. Was it the echo of his hurried breathing that I heard? Harey looked at me again. I realized that, in my excitement, I had almost shouted the last words. Calmed, I sank back into my uncomfortable perch and closed my eyes. How to clarify my thought? — The atom is the ultimate building block of our body. I assume that the F creations are made up of smaller units than ordinary atoms, much smaller. “Mesons,” Sartorius hinted. He was in no way surprised. — No, not mesons… I would have seen them. The power of my device down here is one-tenth to one-twentieth of an angstrom, isn&#39;t it? But we see nothing, nothing at all. They are therefore not mesons. Rather neutrinos. &quot;How do you base this assumption?&quot; Neutrino conglomerates aren&#39;t stable…” “I don&#39;t know. I am not a physicist. Maybe a magnetic field can stabilize them. I don&#39;t know the question. In any case, if my observations are correct, the building is made up of particles ten thousand times smaller than atoms. Wait, I&#39;m not done! If albumin molecules and cells were made directly from these &quot;micro-atoms&quot;, they would have to be proportionally smaller. Globules too, and ferments, everything. But the dimensions are those of the structures of atoms. Consequently, albumin, cell, cell nucleus, everything is only a mask! The real structure, which controls the functioning of the &quot;visitor&quot;, remains concealed more deeply. - Kelvin! Snaut had just stifled a cry. I broke off, terrified. I had said “visitor”. Harey hadn&#39;t heard me. Besides, she wouldn&#39;t have understood. Her head resting in the palm of her hand, she gazed out the window, and the purple dawn surrounded her delicate profile. My distant interlocutors were silent; I heard them breathing. &quot;There&#39;s something to remember about that,&quot; Snaut muttered. &#39;Yes,&#39; remarked Sartorius, &#39;but one thing stops us: the hypothetical Kelvin particles do not constitute the structure of the ocean. The ocean is a structure of atoms. I answered: — It may be capable of producing neutrinos… I suddenly lost interest in their remarks. The conversation was pointless – and not even funny. &quot;Kelvin&#39;s hypothesis would explain this extraordinary resistance and the speed of regeneration,&quot; growled Snaut. Moreover, they probably carry within them an energy source; they don&#39;t need to eat…&#39; &#39;I ask to speak,&#39; interrupted Sartorius. – The horrifying chairman of the debate held firm to the role he had assigned to himself. – I would like to raise the question of the motivation for the appearance of the F creations. I would introduce the question in the following way: what are the F creations? They are not autonomous individuals, nor copies of determined individuals. They are only materialized projections of the contents of our brain, on the theme of a given individual. The correctness of this definition struck me; Sartorius wasn&#39;t nice, but he wasn&#39;t stupid either. I resumed the conversation: - I think you&#39;re right. Your definition would explain why this per…creation appeared, rather than another. Materialization originates in the most durable imprints of memory, particularly differentiated imprints. No footprint, however, can be completely isolated; during &quot;breeding&quot;, fragments of contiguous prints were absorbed. Consequently, the newcomer sometimes reveals more extensive knowledge than that of the authentic individual of whom he is the copy… — Kelvin! Snaut shouted again. Only Snaut reacted to my vocabulary deviations. Sartorius didn&#39;t seem to mind. Did this mean that Sartorius&#39; &quot;visitor&quot; was less perceptive by nature than Snaut&#39;s &quot;visitor&quot;? For a second I imagined the learned Dr. Sartorius flanked by a stunted moron. &quot;Indeed, that corresponds to our observations,&quot; said Sartorius. Now consider the motivation for the apparition! It is quite natural to suppose, in the first place, that we are the object of an experiment. If I examine this thesis, the experimentation seems to me poorly conducted. When we perform an experiment, we take advantage of the results obtained and, above all, we carefully record the failures of our experimentation system. As a result, we are subsequently introducing changes to our way of doing business. However, in the case which concerns us, no modification intervenes. The F creations reappear identical to what they were, without the slightest correction... as disarmed as before, each time we try to... to get rid of them... I decided: &quot;Okay, return fire without corrective device, like Dr. Snaut would say. Findings? &#39;Simply that the experimentation thesis doesn&#39;t sit well with this… this incredible screw-up. The ocean is…precise. The double-level structure of the F creations testifies to this precision. Within certain limits, the F-creations behave in the same way as the real… the… He couldn&#39;t manage to extricate himself! &quot;The originals,&quot; Snaut breathed briskly. — Yes, the originals. But, when the situation no longer corresponds to the normal faculties of… uh… of the original, the creation F undergoes a kind of “disconnection of consciousness”, immediately followed by different, inhuman manifestations… “True, say. -I, and we can have fun compiling a catalog of the behavior of… of these creations – perfectly sterile occupation! “I&#39;m not sure,” protested Sartorius. – I suddenly understood why he irritated me so much: he didn&#39;t speak, he discoursed, as if he had sat at a meeting of the Institute. Apparently, he couldn&#39;t express himself otherwise. “Here comes a question of individuality,” he continued, “of which the ocean has no idea, I&#39;m sure. I believe that the… uh… delicate, shocking aspect of our present condition is completely beyond his comprehension. &quot;Do you think his actions weren&#39;t premeditated?&quot; Sartorius&#39; point of view stunned me somewhat; On reflection, I recognized that it was difficult to exclude him. — No, unlike our colleague Snaut, I don&#39;t believe in any perfidy, in any malice, in any cruel intention… Snaut raised his voice: — I don&#39;t lend him human feelings, but I try to explain to myself these continual returns ! With a secret desire to annoy Sartorius, I say: &#39;Perhaps &quot;they&quot; are plugged into a device that spins in circles and repeats itself, like a record. — Please, dear colleagues; let&#39;s not scatter! I have not finished. Under normal circumstances, I would have thought it premature to present even a provisional report on the progress of my work; given the particular situation, I think I can afford to speak. I have the impression – a feeling, I must add – that Dr. Kelvin&#39;s hypothesis is not without accuracy. I am referring to the hypothesis of a neutrino structure… Our knowledge in this field is purely theoretical; we did not know that there was a possibility of stabilizing such structures. A clearly defined outcome is now before us. The means of neutralizing the magnetic field ensuring the stability of the structure… For a few moments, I had noticed light rays on the screen; a wide slit illuminated, from top to bottom, the left half of the receiver, and I saw a pink object which moved slowly. The shutter slipped again and flew away. Sartorius uttered a heart-rending cry: &quot;Go away!&quot; Go away ! I saw Sartorius&#39;s hands and forearms writhing, struggling, protected by ample laboratory sleeves; a golden disk suddenly shone, then everything went out. Only then did I realize that this yellow disk was a straw hat… I took a deep breath: — Snaut? A tired voice answered me: - Yes, Kelvin ... - Hearing him, I understood that I liked him, and that I preferred not to know who was keeping him company. - That&#39;s enough for now, right? he said. - I think so too. – Before he had hung up, I added hastily: Listen, if you can, come and see me, in the operating room or in my cabin, will you? “Okay, but I don&#39;t know when. Here ended the conference.