A light woke me up in the middle of the night. I propped myself up on one elbow, shielding my eyes with the other hand. Harey, wrapped in a sheet, sat at the foot of the bed, curled up, her face covered in hair. Her shoulders trembled. She cried without making a sound. - Harry! She curled up even more. - What about you?... Harey... I sat on the bed, not quite conscious yet, freeing myself slowly from the nightmare that had choked me a moment ago. The girl was trembling. I embraced her. She elbowed me away. She hid her face. - Sweetheart. - Do not say that. - But, Harey, what&#39;s going on? I saw her wet, trembling face. Thick, childish tears rolled down her cheeks, glistened in the dimple above her chin, dripped onto the sheet. - You do not want me. - What&#39;s on your mind! - I heard. I felt my whole face go stiff. - What did you hear? You didn&#39;t understand, it was just... - No. No. You said it wasn&#39;t me. For me to go. I would. God! I would go, but I can&#39;t. I do not know what is it. I wanted to and I can&#39;t. I&#39;m so, so mean! - Kid!!! I grabbed her, pressed her against me with all my strength, everything was falling apart, kissed her hands, wet and salty fingers, repeated some spells, oaths, apologized, told her it was a stupid, disgusting dream. She slowly calmed down. She stopped crying. Her eyes were huge, sleepwalking. dried up. She turned. head. &quot;No,&quot; she said, &quot;don&#39;t say that, you don&#39;t have to. You&#39;re not the same for me... - I&#39;m not! It came out like a groan. - Yes. You do not want me. I still felt it. I pretended not to see. I thought maybe I was imagining it or something. But no. You act... differently. You do not treat me seriously. It was a dream, true, but I dreamed of you. You spoke to me by name. you were disgusted. Why! Why?! I knelt in front of her and hugged her knees. - Baby... - I don&#39;t want you to say that. I don&#39;t want to, do you hear? I am no child. I&#39;m... She burst into sobs and fell facedown on the bed. I got up. Cool air whirred from the vents. I was cold. I put on my bathrobe, sat on the bed and touched her arm. - Harry, listen. I will tell you something. I&#39;ll tell you the truth... She sat down, leaning slowly on her hands. I could see the pulses pounding under the thin skin of her neck. My face was numb again, and I felt so cold, as if I were standing in the cold. My mind was completely blank. - Truth? - she said. - Holy word? I didn&#39;t answer right away, I had to fight back a spasm in my throat. It was our old spell. When it came down, none of us dared not only to lie, but even to keep silent about anything. There was a time when we tormented ourselves with excessive honesty, in the naive belief that he would save us. &quot;Holy word,&quot; I said seriously. - Harley... She waited. - You&#39;ve changed too. We all change. But that&#39;s not what I wanted to say. The truth is... that for reasons we both don&#39;t know exactly... you can&#39;t leave me. But that&#39;s actually a good thing, because I can&#39;t you either... - Kris! I lifted her, wrapped in a sheet. The horn, wet with tears, rested on my shoulder. I walked around the room and rocked her. She stroked my face. - No. You haven&#39;t changed. It&#39;s me,&quot; she whispered in my ear. - There&#39;s something with me. Maybe this? She stared at the black, empty rectangle of the shattered door, the remains of which I had taken to the warehouse that evening. I&#39;ll have to hang a new one, I thought. I put her on the bed. - Do you sleep at all? I asked, standing over her with my hands down. - I do not know. - How do you not know. Stop, honey. - I don&#39;t think this is a real dream. Maybe I&#39;m sick. I&#39;m just lying there thinking, and you know... She shivered. - What? I asked in a whisper, my voice might have failed me. These are very strange thoughts. I don&#39;t know where they come from. - For example? I need to be calm, I thought, no matter what I hear, and braced myself for her words to be dealt a heavy blow. She shook her head helplessly. - It&#39;s kind of... around... - I don&#39;t understand...? - As if not only in me, but further, somehow, I can&#39;t tell. There are no words for this... - It must be dreams - I said casually and sighed. &quot;And now we&#39;ll turn off the light and we&#39;ll have no worries until morning, and in the morning, if we want, we&#39;ll get a new one.&quot; Okay? She reached for the switch, and darkness fell, and I lay down on the cold sheets and felt the warmth of her approaching breath. I embraced her. &quot;Harder,&quot; she whispered. And after a long time: - Kris! - What? - I love you. I wanted to scream. The morning was red. The swollen disk of the sun stood low on the horizon. There was a letter on the doorstep. I tore open the envelope. Ha-rey was in the bathroom, I heard her humming. From time to time she peeked out from there, plastered with wet hair. I went to the window and read: &quot;Kelvin, we&#39;re stuck. Sartorius is for vigorous action. He believes he can destabilize neutrino systems. He needs a certain amount of plasma for his experiments as the starting material of F. I suggest you go on a reconnaissance and get some plasma into a reservoir. Use it at your discretion, but let me know your decision. I have no opinion. I don&#39;t seem to have anything anymore. I&#39;d rather you just do it because we&#39;re going to be moving, even if only superficially. Otherwise, there is only envy G. Szczur PS. Don&#39;t go to the radio station. You can still do that for me. My heart sank as I read that letter. I looked it over carefully, tore it up, and threw the shreds into the sink. Then I started looking for a jumpsuit for Harey. That was already terrible. Just like last time. But she didn&#39;t know anything otherwise she wouldn&#39;t have been so pleased when I told her I had to do a little scouting outside the Station and ask her to accompany me.We ate breakfast in the small kitchen (with Harey barely swallowing a few bites again) and went to the library. look at the literature on field problems and neutrino systems before doing what Sartorius wants. I didn&#39;t know how I was going to go about it yet, but I decided to keep his work under control. and Sartorius, and I would wait out the &quot;operation&quot; with Harey somewhere outside - on an airplane, for example. I pored over a large electronic catalog for a while, asking him a question, which he either answered by throwing out a flashcard with the terse word &quot;Not in Bibliography,&quot; or he suggested venturing into such a jungle of specialized physical work that I didn&#39;t know what to make of it. somehow I wanted to leave this great, round room with smooth walls, gridded drawers filled with microfilms and electronic records. Located in the center of the Station, the library had no windows and was the best insulated place inside a steel shell. despite the evident fiasco of the search, I wandered around the great hall until I stood before a huge, ceiling-high bookcase full of books, not so much a luxury, at least a dubious one, as a tribute to and respect for the pioneers of Solaria&#39;s exploration: shelves, numbering about six hundred volumes, carried the entire classics of the subject, starting with the monumental, though largely in the outdated nine-volume monograph of Giese. I took out those volumes, from the weight of which my hand immediately hung, and leafed through them casually, perched on the arm of the chair. Harey found a book too - I read a few lines of print over her shoulder. It was one of the few books that belonged to the first voyage, probably once owned by Giese himself - &quot;Interplanetary Cook&quot; ... I said nothing, seeing Harey&#39;s intent study of recipes adapted to the rigors of space exploration, and returned to my venerable &quot;Ten Years of Solaris Research&quot; came out in the Solariana series as items four through thirteen, whereas the current ones have four-figure numbers. perhaps the imagination and the ability to make hasty hypotheses don&#39;t become so fatal.After all, anything is possible on this planet.The unbelievable-sounding descriptions of the constellations that plasma creates are in all likelihood genuine, though generally unverifiable, for the ocean seldom repeats its evolution. Observing them for the first time, they terrify mainly with their strangeness and enormity, if they appeared in a small size scale, in a puddle, it would probably be considered just another &quot;freak of nature&quot;, a manifestation of randomness and blind power play. The fact that mediocrity and genius become equally helpless in the face of the inexhaustible variety of solar forms does not make it easier to commune with the phenomena of the living ocean either. Giese was neither one nor the other. He was simply a pedant classifier, the kind whose outward calm hides the life-consuming, tireless ferocity of his work. As long as he could, he simply used the language of description, and when words failed him, he coped by creating new words, often unfortunate, incompatible with the described phenomena. But in the end, no terms can do justice to what&#39;s happening on Solaris. His &quot;mountains&quot;, his &quot;longwoods&quot;, &quot;mushrooms&quot;, &quot;mimoids&quot;, &quot;sym-triads&quot; and &quot;asymtriads&quot;, &quot;streptococci&quot; and &quot;swift&quot; sound wildly artificial, but they give some idea of Solaris even to those who blurred photographs and imperfect videos they saw nothing. Of course, this conscientious classifier has sinned with more than one carelessness. Man makes hypotheses all the time, even when he&#39;s on his guard, even when he doesn&#39;t know it. Giese believed that &quot;longs&quot; constituted the basic form, and compared it with the many times enlarged and piled up tidal waves of the terrestrial seas. Anyone who dug in the first edition of his work knows that he originally called them &quot;tides&quot;, inspired by geocentrism, which would be funny if not for his helplessness. After all, if we are to look for comparisons on Earth, these are formations larger than the Grand Canyon of Colorado, modeled in a material that has a gelatinous-foamy consistency on the top (with this foam congealing into huge, easily crumbling festoons, into laces eyes, and even to some researchers it presented itself as &quot;skeleton-like growths&quot;) - and in the depths it changes into a substance that is more and more firm, like a tense muscle, but a muscle that soon exceeds, at a depth of several meters, the hardness of a boulder, although still retaining its elasticity Between the walls tense like a membrane on the monster&#39;s back, to which the &quot;skeletons&quot; cling, stretches for miles the proper &quot;length&quot;, a seemingly independent creation, like some colossal python that has eaten whole mountains and is now digesting them in silence, since time immemorial. for a while, putting his fish-like body into slow, quivering movements. But this is what the &quot;long&quot; looks like only from above, from the deck of a flying machine. When approached, until both &quot;walls of the ravine&quot; rise hundreds of meters above the plane, the &quot;python&#39;s body&quot; is a stretched out horizon of motion so vertiginous that it takes on the appearance of a passively swollen cylinder. The first impression is a swirl of slippery, grey-greenish goo, which in piles rejects strong flashes of the sun, but when the machine hovers just above the surface (and the edges of the &quot;ravine&quot; hiding the &quot;long&quot; become, as it were, peaks on both sides of a geological depression) , you can see that the movement is much more complicated. It has concentric circuits, darker streams intersect in it, and at times the outer &quot;mantle&quot; becomes a mirror surface reflecting the sky and clouds, pierced with the roar of gunshots by eruptions of a gaseous, semi-liquid medium. one has the center of action of the forces that keep the flanks of sluggishly crystallizing jelly stretched sideways, skyward, but what is obvious to the eye is not so readily understood by science. within the &quot;long-legs&quot; that plow the vastness of the living ocean by millions. It was thought that they were some kind of monster&#39;s organs, that metabolism, respiratory processes, transport of nutrients took place in them, and only dusty libraries knew what else. Each hypothesis was finally refuted by a thousand tedious and sometimes dangerous experiments. And all this applies only to the &quot;longs&quot;, the form that is basically the simplest, the most durable, because their existence is counted in weeks - a quite unique thing here. reflexive - there are &quot;mimoids&quot;. It can be said without exaggeration that Giese loved them and devoted himself to studying them, describing them, guessing their essence. With the name, he tried to convey what is most peculiar about them for man: a certain tendency to imitate the surrounding forms, no matter whether they are close or distant. One day, deep below the surface of the ocean, a flat, wide circle begins to darken, with jagged edges and a tar-like surface. After a dozen or so hours, it becomes layered, reveals more and more distinct dismemberments, and at the same time breaks through upwards, towards the surface. The observer would swear there was a violent struggle going on below him, for from all around converged here like contracting lips, like living, muscular, closing craters, endless ranks of concurrent circular waves heaped over the spilled blackish, tossing delirious and, rearing up, they fall down. Each such fall of hundreds of thousands of tons is accompanied for seconds by a stretched, sticky, clattering, one would like to say, thunder, because here everything happens on a monstrous scale. The dark thing is pushed down, each successive blow seems to flatten and split it, from individual lobes that hang down like wet wings, long clusters separate, narrow into long necklaces, fuse with each other and flow upward, as if carrying they are attached to them by the cavalised mother shield, and meanwhile from above they constantly fall into the ever more distinctly collapsing ring of successive rings of waves. And this game goes on sometimes a day, sometimes a month. Sometimes it all ends there. Conscientious Giese called this variant the &quot;abortive mimoid,&quot; as if he knew from some unknown source that the ultimate goal of any such cataclysm was the &quot;mature mimoid,&quot; that is, that colony of polypous, light-skinned growths (usually larger than an earthly city) whose the destiny is to ape external shapes... Of course, there was also another solarist named Uyvens, who considered this last phase to be &quot;degenerative&quot;, as degeneration, dying, and the forest of created shapes as an obvious manifestation of the liberation of detached creations from the dominion of the matrix. However, Giese, who in all descriptions of other solar formations behaves like an ant walking on a frozen waterfall, not allowing himself to be disturbed by anything from the measured step of his dry phrase, was so sure of himself that he arranged the individual phases of the emergence of the mimoid in a sequence of increasing perfection. from above, the mimoid seems to resemble a city, but this is an illusion caused by pos searching for any analogy among the known. When the sky is clear, all the high-rises and their top palisades are surrounded by a layer of heated air, causing shapes that are already difficult to pinpoint to seem to sway and sag. The first cloud gliding blue (I say this out of habit, because this &quot;blue&quot; is red to red, and terrifyingly white on a blue day) arouses an immediate response. a cauliflower-like coating that fades at the same time and after a few minutes imitates a cumulus cloud. This huge object casts a reddish shadow, one peak of the mimoid seems to follow another, the movement is always in the opposite direction to the movement of the real cloud. I think Giese would give himself he would probably cut off his hand to find out at least why this is so. But such &quot;solitary&quot; products of the mimoid are nothing compared to the exuberant activity of being &quot;excited&quot; by the presence of objects and shapes that appear above him due to terrestrial visitors. Reproduction of forms includes, in fact, everything that comes within a distance of eight - nine miles. Most often, the mimoid produces an enlarged reproduction, sometimes distorting it, creating caricatures or grotesque simplifications, especially of machines. Obviously, the material is always the same, rapidly fading mass, which, thrown into the air, instead of falling, hangs, united by easily tearing umbilical cords with the ground, on which it moves crawling, and at the same time, shrinking, constricting or swelling, arranges smoothly into the most intricate patterns. An airplane, a truss or a mast are reproduced with equal speed; mimoid does not react only to people themselves, and strictly speaking to any living beings, including plants, because these were brought to Solaris for experimental purposes by tireless researchers. On the other hand, a dummy, a human effigy, a statue of a dog or a tree carved from any material is copied immediately. And here, unfortunately, it should be noted in parentheses that this &quot;obedience&quot; of the mimoid towards the experimenters, so exceptional on Solaris, is sometimes suspended. The most mature mimoid experiences its &quot;lazy days&quot;, during which it only pulses very slowly. This pulsation is not perceptible to the eye anyway, its rhythm, a single phase of &quot;pulse&quot; lasts over two hours, and it took special film shots to discover it. In such circumstances, the mimoid, especially the old one, is perfect for sightseeing, because submerged in the ocean, as well as the formations raised from it, give the foot more than enough support. Of course, one can stay within the mimoid also during its &quot;busy&quot; days, but then the visibility is close to zero, due to the constant fall of the fluffy suspension, whitish as ground snow colloidal, which is constantly pouring from the swollen branches of the abdomen, which copies the forms. These forms, moreover, cannot be grasped from close up, due to their immensity on the scale of mountains. Moreover, the ground of the &quot;working&quot; mimoid becomes muddy from the fleshy rain, which is cut into a hard crust, many times lighter than pumice, only after a dozen or so hours. they are semi-liquid geysers, even in full sun, because its rays cannot penetrate the cover of &quot;imitating explosions&quot; constantly thrown into the atmosphere. Observing the mimoid in its happy days (these are, more precisely, the happy days of the researcher above it) can be a source of indelible impressions. He has his &quot;creative highs&quot; when he starts an amazing hyperproduction. Then he creates either his own variants of external forms, or their complications or even &quot;formal continuations&quot;, and in this way he can amuse himself for hours to the delight of an abstract painter and to the despair of a scholar who it is in vain to try to understand anything about the processes taking place. Sometimes the mimoid&#39;s activity shows features of almost childish simplification, sometimes it falls into the &quot;baroque deviation&quot;, then everything it creates is marked with the mark of bloated ivory. Old mimoids in particular fabricate shapes capable of making hearty laughs. to laugh at them, too shocked by the mystery of the spectacle.Of course, in the first years of research, the mimoids were rushed directly to the supposedly dreamed centers of the Solarian Ocean, as the places where the desired contact of the two civilizations would take place. However, there is no question of any contact, because everything begins and ends with the imitation of shapes, which leads nowhere. The anthropomorphism, constantly returning in the desperate searches of researchers, saw in ever different products of the living ocean &quot;sensory organs&quot; or even &quot;sensory organs&quot; limbs&quot; for which scholars (like Maartens and Ekkonai) for a time took &quot;streptococci&quot; and Giese&#39;s &quot;chick&quot;. But these living assessment prominences, sometimes shooting up to two miles into the atmosphere, are as much &quot;limbs&quot; as an earthquake is the &quot;gymnastics&quot; of its crust. The catalog of forms repeating relatively constantly, generated by the living ocean so often that at least several dozen or several hundred can be discovered on its surface per day, includes about three hundred items. The most inhuman, in the sense of being absolutely unlike anything experienced by man on Earth, are, according to Giese&#39;s school, symmetriads. When it was already well known that the ocean does not behave aggressively and only those who take special care of it due to their own carelessness or thoughtlessness can die in its plasma depths (I am not, of course, talking about accidents caused by, for example, damage to the oxygen apparatus or air conditioner) that even cylindrical rivers of long rivers and monstrous pillars of streptococci wandering erratically among the clouds can be pierced through by an airplane or other flying machine without the slightest danger; the plasma gives way, parting before the foreign body with the speed of sound equal to the speed of sound in Solaria&#39;s atmosphere, opening, if forced to it, deep tunnels even under the surface of the ocean (and the energy it immediately releases for this purpose is enormous - Scriabin calculated it in extreme cases at 1019 erg!!!). The study of symmetriads was approached with extreme caution, with constant backtracking, multiplication of safeguards, although often fictitious, and the names of those who first ventured into their depths are known to every child on Earth. The terror of these giants is not in their appearance, although they can really give you nightmares. Rather, it comes from the fact that there is nothing permanent or certain within them, even physical laws are suspended in them. It was the researchers of symmetriads who always repeated the thesis that the living ocean is intelligent. Symmetriads arise suddenly. Their birth is a kind of eruption. About an hour beforehand, the ocean begins to glow violently, as if glazed over several dozen square kilometers. Apart from that, its fluidity and undulation rhythm do not change. Sometimes a symmetriad breaks out where there was a crater after the slug sucked in, but this is not the rule. After an hour or so, the glistening coating bursts up in a monstrous bubble in which the entire sky, the sun, clouds, all horizons are reflected, shimmering and refracting. The lightning play of colors, caused partly by deflection and partly by refraction of light, is unparalleled. Particularly violent lighting effects are produced by symmetriads formed during a blue day and just before sunset. Then one has the impression that the planet is giving birth to a second one, doubling its volume with every moment. The blazing globe, barely launched from the depths, will burst at the top into vertical sectors, but this is not disintegration. This stage, not so fortunately called the &quot;flower calyx phase,&quot; lasts seconds. The arches of membranous spans that point skyward turn around, interlock in an invisible interior, and begin to form instantly a kind of stocky torso within which hundreds of phenomena occur at once. investigated for the first time by the Hamalei team of seventy, there is a giant- and poly-crystallization that gives rise to an axial lifting pin, sometimes called a &quot;spine&quot;, but I am not a proponent of this term. The breakneck architecture of this central support is sustained in statu nascendi by vertical pillars of jelly so rarefied as to be almost watery, gushing constantly from kilometer-long hollows. In the process, the colossus utters a dull, drawn-out roar, surrounded by a shaft of rapidly fluttering, snow-covered, thick-walled foam. Then there are - from the center to the periphery - extremely complicated rotations of thickened planes, on which deposits of elastic material emanating from the depths are built up, while at the same time the deep-sea geysers mentioned a moment ago transform, solidifying, into mobile tentacle-like columns, their bunches heading towards a precisely defined direction. the dynamics of the whole to the places of the structure, resembling some sky-high gills of a fetus growing with a thousandfold acceleration, through which flow streams of pink blood and water so dark green that it is almost black. From that moment, the symmetriad begins to manifest its most extraordinary property - modeling or even suspending certain physical laws. Let&#39;s say first that no two symmetriads are alike, and that the geometry of each is like a new &quot;invention&quot; of the living ocean. Further, the symmetriad produces within itself what are often called &quot;momentary machines,&quot; although these creations are nothing like machines constructed by people, it is only about the relatively narrow and thus &quot;mechanical&quot; purposefulness of action. When the geysers emanating from the abyss become concentrated or swell into thick-walled galleries and corridors running in all directions, and the &quot;membranes&quot; form a system of intersecting planes, overhangs, ceilings, the symmetriade justifies its name by the fact that each shape of winding flights, passages and ramps within one pole corresponds to a faithfully detailed arrangement at the opposite pole. After about twenty or thirty minutes, the giant begins its slow descent, sometimes after first tilting in the vertical axis by eight to twelve degrees. There are major symmetries and minor symmetries, but even dwarfs rise a good eight hundred meters above the horizon when submerged and are visible from a distance of several miles. It is safest to get inside just after equilibrium is reached, when the whole ceases to plunge into the living ocean, and at the same time returns to the exact vertical; the most appropriate point of penetration is the area just below the peak. The relatively smooth polar &quot;cap&quot; there is surrounded by an area riddled with teat-like openings of internal chambers and conduits. The formation is, taken as a whole, a three-dimensional expansion of some higher-order equation. As we know, any equation can be expressed in the figurative language of higher geometry and a solid equivalent to it can be built. The symmetriad is, in this sense, a relative of Lobaczewski&#39;s cones and negative Riemannian curvatures, but a very distant relative because of its unimaginable complexity. The simplest, of course, was the thought that we had before us nothing more than a &quot;mathematical machine&quot; of the living ocean, a model of calculations made on its scale for an unknown purpose , but this Fermont hypothesis and no one shares it anymore. It was certainly tempting - but the idea that with such titanic eruptions, each particle of which is constantly subjected to complicated formulas of great analysis, the living ocean discusses the issues of matter, cosmos, existence ... could not be sustained. There are too many phenomena in the depths of the giant that cannot be reconciled with this simple (childishly naive, as some people want) image. There were many attempts to come up with an accessible model of the symmetry, to visualize it; the example of Averian was quite popular, who put it like this: Imagine an ancient earthly structure from the glory days of Babylon, let it be made of a living, excitable and evolutionary substance; its architecture flows smoothly through a series of transitional phases, taking on the forms of Greek and Romanesque architecture before our eyes, then the columns begin to slenderize like stems, the vault loses its weight, evaporates, sharpens, the arches turn into steep parabolas, and finally break into soaring arches. The Gothic thus created begins to mature and grow old, it flows into late forms, the hitherto austerity of a steep ascent, ascension is replaced by eruptions of orgiastic exuberance, baroque fruiting in excess grows before our eyes if we continue this sequence, constantly treating our changing creation as individual stages of living existence, we will finally come to the architecture of the cosmodromic era, at the same time perhaps getting closer to understanding what a symmetria is. But this comparison, however developed and enriched (there have been attempts to visualize it with the help of special models and film), remains something impotent at best, and at worst a evasion, if not simply a lie, because the symmetria is not like anything earthly. A man can grasp so few things at once; we only see what is happening in front of us, here and now; it is beyond his capacity to visualize the simultaneous multitude of processes, however interrelated, however even complementary. We experience this even with relatively simple phenomena. The fate of one man can mean a lot, the fate of several hundred is difficult to embrace, but the history of a thousand, a million, in fact, means nothing. The symmetriad is a million, no, a billion raised to a power, the unimaginable itself; what if, in the depths of some of its naves, which are ten times the space of the Kronecker, we stand like ants clinging to the folds of the breathing vault, that we see the rise of gigantic planes, iridescent gray in the light of our flares, their interpenetration, softness and infallible perfection of the solution, which is only moment - because everything flows here - the content of this architecture is movement, focused and purposeful. We observe a fragment of the process, the vibration of one string in a symphony orchestra of supergiants, and not much of that, because we know - but we only know, without comprehension - that simultaneously above and below us, in the soaring abysses, beyond the limits of sight and imagination, millions and millions of simultaneous transformations are taking place, related to each other like notes with mathematical counterpoint. So someone called it a geometric symphony, but then we are deaf to it. Here, to see anything really, you would have to run away, go back into some immense distance, but after all, everything in symmetry is the interior, multiplication, bursting with avalanches of births, constant shaping, with shaping being at the same time shaping, and no mimosa is so sensitive to touch how miles away from the place where we stand, a part of the symmetry separated by hundreds of storeys, to the changes that our place is experiencing. Here, every momentary construction, with a beauty that finds fulfillment beyond the limits of sight, is a co-constructor and conductor of all the others that share, and they, in turn, model it. A symphony - fine, but one that creates itself and chokes itself. The end of the symmetry is terrible. No one who saw him could resist the impression that he had witnessed a tragedy, if not a murder. After about two or three hours at the most - this explosive growth, reproduction and self-generation never lasts - the living ocean attacks. This is what it looks like: the smooth surface ripples, the already quenched, foam-covered surf begins to boil, concentric wave sequences rush from the horizon, the same muscular craters as those that assist the birth of the mimoid, but this time their size is incomparably larger. The undersea part of the symmetriad is squeezed, the colossus rises slowly, as if about to be thrown off the planet; the top layers of oceanic glia begin to activate, creep higher and higher, onto the side walls, coat them, solidify, brick up the openings, but all this is nothing compared to what is happening simultaneously in the depths. First, the form-creating processes - the emergence of successive architectonics from each other - freeze for a short while, then undergo a rapid acceleration, movements so far, smooth permeations, folds, spreading of warps and vaults, regular so far and as sure as if they were to last for centuries, they start to run. The feeling that the colossus, in the face of imminent danger, begins to violently strive for some fulfillment becomes overwhelming. However, the more the speed of change increases, the more obvious becomes the horrible, disgusting metamorphosis of the building material itself and its dynamics. All the knocking down of wonderfully supple planes soften, flake, sag, stumbles begin to appear, unfinished forms, gargantuan, crippled, from the invisible depths comes a rising noise, a roar, air, expelled as in some agonal breath, rubbing against the narrowing straits, snoring and playing thunderously in passages, it stimulates the collapsing ceilings to creak like monstrous larynxes, stalactites of mucus, dead vocal strings, and the viewer is instantly overwhelmed, despite the most violent movement that is unleashing - after all, it is a movement of destruction - complete deadness. Only the hurricane howling from the abyss, traversing it through thousands of shafts, supports, distends, the sky structure, which begins to flow downwards, collapse like a comb caught in flames, but here and there you can still see the last flutters, inert, detached from the rest of the movement, blind, weaker and weaker until constantly attacked from the outside, washed away, it collapses with the slowness of a mountain and disappears in the depths of foams, the same as those that accompanied its titanic rise. And what does it all mean? Yes, what does that mean... I remember a school trip visiting the Solarian Institute in Aden when I was Gibarian&#39;s assistant, and after passing through a side room of the library, the youth were ushered into the main room, the lion&#39;s share of which is filled with microfilm cassettes. There are tiny fragments of the inside of symmetriads recorded on them, of course long gone, but there are more than ninety thousand of them, not photos, but whole spools. And then a fat, maybe fifteen-year-old girl with glasses, with a resolute and intelligent look, suddenly asked a question: - And what is all this for...? And in the awkward silence that followed, only the teacher looked sternly at her unruly pupil; none of the solarists (I was among them) found the answer. Because symmetriads are unrepeatable and the phenomena occurring in them are unrepeatable. Sometimes the air in them ceases to conduct sound. Sometimes the refractive index increases or decreases. Locally there are pulsating, rhythmic changes in gravity, as if the symmetry-da had a beating gravitational heart. Occasionally, researchers&#39; gyrocompasses begin to behave like madmen, layers of increased ionization appear and disappear, the enumeration could be continued. Besides, if the mystery of the symmetriads is ever solved, there will still be asymmetrias... They arise similarly, only they have a different end, and nothing can be seen in them but quivering, blazing, flickering; all we know is that they harbor vertiginous processes at the limits of physically possible speeds, and they are also called &quot;exaggerated quantum phenomena.&quot; Their mathematical resemblance to certain models of the atom, however, is so fickle and fleeting that some consider them a side-effect or even They live incomparably shorter than those, a dozen or so minutes, and their end is probably even more terrible, because in the wake of the hurricane that fills them and bursts them with hard, roaring air, liquid swells in them with hellish speed, boiling under the sheepskin of dirty foam and drowns everything, bubbling, hideous, then comes an explosion like a mud volcano, throwing up a matted column of debris that rains macerated debris for a long time on the restless surface of the ocean. to some membranous bone or cartilage, can be found floating on the waves many tens of kilometers beyond focus of the explosion. A separate group consists of formations that are completely separated from the living ocean for a shorter or longer time, which are much less frequent and more difficult to observe than those. Their remains, found for the first time, were identified completely falsely, as it turned out much later, as the corpses of creatures living in the depths of the ocean. At times they seem to flee like strange, many-winged birds from the trumpets of swifts chasing them, but this concept, taken from Earth, once again becomes a wall. which cannot be surpassed. Sometimes, but very rarely, on the rocky shores of the islands, you can see peculiar flightless seals lying in schools, resting in the sun or lazily crawling into the sea to merge with it. And so they kept turning in the circle of earthly, human concepts, and the first contact ... Expeditions traveled hundreds of kilometers in the depths of symmetries, set up recorders, automatic film cameras; the television eyes of the artificial satellites recorded the budding of mimoids and longpods, their maturation and death. Libraries filled up, archives grew, the price that had to be paid for it became sometimes high. Seven hundred and eighteen people died in the cataclysms without withdrawing in time from the already doomed colossi, one hundred and six of them in one catastrophe, famous because it also killed Giese himself, then an old man of seventy, when the end, usually characteristic of asymmetries , unexpectedly met a formation that is clearly a symmetry. Seventy-nine people along with machines, apparatuses, dressed in armored suits, were engulfed in seconds by an explosion of muddy slime, attracting with their shootings twenty-seven more, who were piloting planes and helicopters circling over the examined formation. This place, at the intersection of the forty-second parallel and the eighty-ninth meridian, is marked on maps as the Hundred-Six Eruption. But this point exists only on maps, for the surface of the ocean there is no different from all its other areas. At that time, for the first time in the history of Solarian research, there were voices demanding the use of thermonuclear shocks. It was actually supposed to be crueler than revenge: it was about destroying what we cannot comprehend. Tsanken, Giese&#39;s second-in-command, only survived by mistake - the relay automaton had falsely marked the spot where they were studying the symmetria, so that Tsanken was wandering in his machine over the ocean and arrived literally minutes after the explosion, flying, still seeing its black fungus - as the decision was being weighed, he threatened to blow up the station with himself and the eighteen others in it, and while it has never been officially acknowledged that this suicide ultimatum affected the outcome of the vote, it can be assumed that it did. But the days when such large-scale expeditions haunted the planet are long gone. The Station itself - its construction supervised by satellites, an engineering project of a scale that Earth would have been proud of, had it not been for the fact that the ocean spawned structures a million times larger in seconds - was created in the form of a disc two hundred meters in diameter, with four storeys in the center and two on the periphery. Suspended five hundred to fifteen hundred meters above the ocean, thanks to gravitors powered by the energy of annihilation, it was equipped, in addition to all the devices that ordinary Stations and large satellites of other planets have, with special radar sensors, ready to activate additional power at the first change of ocean surface, so that the steel disc floats into the stratosphere as the first signs of the birth of a new living creature appear. Now the Station was virtually deserted. Since the automatons were locked - for reasons still unknown to me - in the bottom warehouses, it was possible to go through the corridors without encountering anyone, as in a blind drifting wreck whose machines had survived the destruction of the crew. As I put the ninth volume of Giese&#39;s monograph on the shelf, it seemed to me that the steel, hidden under a layer of fluffy foam plastic, trembled under my feet. I stilled, but the shaking didn&#39;t happen again. The library was perfectly isolated from the rest of the body, the vibrations could only have one cause. A rocket took off from the station. The thought brought me back to reality. I wasn&#39;t quite sure yet whether I would fly as Sartorius had wished. By behaving as if I fully accepted his plans, the best I could do was delay the crisis; I was pretty sure there was going to be a fight because I decided to do what I could to save Harey. The point is whether Sartorius had a chance of success. His advantage over me was huge - as a physicist, he knew the problem ten times better than I did and I could only, paradoxically, count on the perfection of the solutions that the ocean offered us. For the next hour I pored over the microfilms, trying to pick out something comprehensible from the sea of infernal mathematics whose language was the physics of neutrino processes. At first it seemed hopeless to me, especially since there were five incredibly difficult theories of the neutrino field, a clear sign that none is perfect. And yet I managed to finally find something promising. I was just copying formulas when there was a knock. I walked quickly to the door and opened it, blocking the gap with my body. It revealed Snaut&#39;s face glistening with sweat. The corridor behind him was empty. &quot;Oh, it&#39;s you,&quot; I said, opening the door. - Come in. &quot;Yes, it&#39;s me,&quot; he replied. His voice was hoarse, there were bags under red eyes, he wore a shiny rubber anti-radiation apron with elastic suspenders, the same dirty trousers he always wore poking out from under the apron. His eyes wandered around the round, evenly lit room and froze as he saw Harey in the background standing next to the chair. We exchanged quick glances, I closed my eyes, then he bowed slightly, and I, getting into a sociable tone, said, &quot;This is Dr. Snaut, Harey.&quot; Snaut, this is ... my wife. &quot;I&#39;m... a very invisible member of the crew, and that&#39;s why...&quot; the pause lengthened dangerously &quot;I haven&#39;t had a chance to meet...&quot; Harey smiled and offered him her hand, which he shook with what I thought was a little stunned, blinked He opened his eyes a few times and stood looking at her until I took his arm. &quot;I&#39;m sorry,&quot; he said to her then. &quot;I wanted to talk to you, Kelvin...&quot; &quot;Of course,&quot; I replied with some great-world ease; it all sounded like a cheesy comedy to me, but there was no help. &quot;Harey, honey, don&#39;t disturb yourself. We need to talk to the doctor about our boring business... And I was already leading him by the elbow to the little seats on the opposite side of the room. Harey sat down in the chair I had been sitting in, but she pushed him so far that she could see us when she looked up from her book. - What&#39;s up? I asked quietly. &quot;I&#39;m divorced,&quot; he replied in the same, only wheezy whisper. Perhaps I would have laughed if I had ever been told that story and that conversation starter, but on the Station my sense of humor was amputated. &quot;I&#39;ve lived a few years since yesterday, Kelvin,&quot; he added. - A couple of good years. And you? &quot;Nothing...&quot; I replied after a moment, because I didn&#39;t know what to say. I liked him, but I felt I had to be wary of him now, or rather of what he had come to me with. - Nothing? he repeated in the same tone as me. - Please, is it so...? - What do you mean? I pretended not to understand. He narrowed his bloodshot eyes and, leaning down so that I could feel the warmth of his breath on my face, he whispered, &quot;We&#39;re sinking, Kelvin.&quot; I can&#39;t get through to Sartorius anymore, all I know is what I wrote to you, what he told me after our little lovely conference... - Turned off the visiphone? I asked. - No. He has a short circuit there. Looks like he did it on purpose or...&#39; He made a fist motion as if he was breaking something. I stared at him without saying a word. The left corner of his mouth turned up into an unpleasant smile. - Kelvin, I came because... He didn&#39;t finish. - What are you going to do? - You mean this letter...? I replied slowly. &quot;I can do it, I see no reason to refuse, that&#39;s why I&#39;m sitting here, I wanted to find out...&quot; &quot;No,&quot; he stopped. - Not that... - No...? I said feigning surprise. - So I&#39;m listening. &quot;Sartorius,&quot; he muttered after a moment. - He thinks he&#39;s found a way... you know. He didn&#39;t take his eyes off me. I sat quietly, trying to keep my face neutral. - First there&#39;s the X-ray thing. What Gibarian did to him, you remember. Some modification is possible... - What? “They just sent a beam of rays into the ocean and only modulated its intensity in various patterns. - Yes I know about it. Nilin has already done that. And a whole lot of others. - Yes, but they used soft radiation. It was hard, they were packing all they had into the ocean, all their power. &quot;That could have unpleasant consequences,&quot; I pointed out. - Violation of the convention of the four and the UN. - Kelvin... don&#39;t pretend. It doesn&#39;t matter now. Gibarian is dead. - Oh, Sartorius wants to blame everything on him? - I do not know. I didn&#39;t talk to him about it. It&#39;s not important. Sartorius believes that since the &quot;visitor&quot; always appears only when you wake up, he must be extracting the production recipe from us while we sleep. He believes that our most important state is sleep. our waking mind - thoughts from the vigil - do you understand?&quot; &quot;How? By mail?&quot; &quot;You will frame the jokes separately. This bunch of rays will be modulated by brain currents of one of us. Suddenly my head cleared.&quot; &quot;Oh,&quot; I said. &quot;That someone is me.&quot; &quot;What?&quot; &quot;Yes. He was thinking of you.&quot; &quot;Thanks so much.&quot; &quot;What do you say?&quot; &quot;Then how...?&quot; he said. I shrugged. &quot;I consider these x-ray sermons about the greatness of man to be buffoonery. And neither do you. Maybe not?&quot; &quot;Yes?&quot; &quot;Yes.&quot; &quot;That&#39;s very good,&quot; he said and smiled, as if I granted his wish - So you&#39;re against this Sa story rtorius. I didn&#39;t quite understand how it had happened yet, but I could tell by the look in his eyes that he had taken me where he wanted me to go. I was silent, what could I say now? &quot;Perfect,&quot; he said. Because there&#39;s another project. To rebuild Roche&#39;s apparatus. - Annihilator...? - Yes. Sartorius has already done some preliminary calculations. It&#39;s real. And it won&#39;t even require a lot of power. The apparatus will be active around the clock or for an unlimited time, producing antipoles. - Hi... wait! How do you imagine it?! - Very simple. This will be the neutrino antipole. Ordinary matter remains unchanged. Only... neutrino systems are annihilated. Understand? He smiled with satisfaction. I sat with my mouth half open. He slowly stopped smiling. He looked at me searchingly, frowning, and waited. &quot;The first &#39;Thought&#39; project, then, we reject. What? The second? Sartorius is already in it. We&#39;ll call it &#39;Freedom.&#39; I closed my eyes for a moment. Suddenly I made up my mind. Snaut was not a physicist. Sartorius disabled or destroyed the visiphone. Very good. &quot;I&#39;d rather call it &#39;The Slaughterhouse&#39;...&quot; I said slowly. &quot;You were a butcher yourself. Maybe not? And now it&#39;s going to be something completely different. No &#39;visitors&#39;, no F-creatures - nothing. Already at the moment of appearance of materialization - there will be a disintegration. &quot;It&#39;s a misunderstanding,&quot; I replied, shaking my head with a smile I hoped was natural enough. It&#39;s not moral scruples, it&#39;s self-preservation. I don&#39;t want to die, Snaut. - What...? He was surprised. He looked at me suspiciously. I pulled a crumpled piece of paper from my pocket. - I thought about that too. Does it surprise you? I was the first to put forward the neutrino hypothesis, wasn&#39;t I? Look. Antipoles can be raised. It is harmless to ordinary matter. That&#39;s true. But at the moment of destabilization, when the neutrino system breaks down, its bond energy is released as a surplus. Assuming ten to eight ergs for one kilogram of rest mass, we get five to seven times ten to eight for one F-form. You know what it means? Equivalent to a small uranium charge that explodes inside the Station. - What are you talking about! But... but Sartorius must have considered that... &quot;Not necessarily,&quot; I denied with a malicious smile. - See, the point is that Sartorius is from the school of Frazer and Cajolli. According to them, the entire energy of the bonds at the moment of disintegration is released in the form of light radiation. It would just be a strong flash, not entirely safe, but not destructive. But there are other hypotheses, other neutrino field theories. According to Cayatt, according to Avalov, according to Siona, the emission spectrum is much wider, and the maximum falls on hard gamma radiation. It&#39;s nice that Sartorius believes his masters and their theories, but there are others, Snaut. And you know what I&#39;ll tell you? I continued, seeing that my words impressed him. - The ocean must also be considered. If he did what he did, he must have used the optimal method. In other words: his action seems to me to be an argument in favor of the latter school - against Sartorius. - Give me that card, Kelvin... I handed it to him. He tilted his head, trying to read my scribbles. - What is this? he pointed. I took the card from him. - This? Field transmutation tensor. - Give it to me... - What do you need? I asked. I knew what he would say. - I have to show Sartorius. &quot;As you wish,&quot; I replied indifferently. - I can give you this. You see, no one has tested it experimentally, we haven&#39;t seen such systems yet. He believes in Frazer, and I calculated with Siona. He&#39;ll tell you I&#39;m not a physicist and neither is Siona. At least in his understanding. But that&#39;s up for discussion. I don&#39;t want a discussion that will evaporate to the greater glory of Sartorius. I can convince you, not him. And I won&#39;t try. - So what do you want to do...? He&#39;s working on it,&quot; Snaut said flatly. He hunched over, all his animation gone. I didn&#39;t know if he trusted me, but I didn&#39;t care. &quot;What a man they&#39;re trying to kill does,&quot; I replied quietly. - I&#39;ll try to contact him. Maybe he&#39;s thinking about some security,&quot; Snaut muttered. He looked up at me. &quot;Look, what if...?&quot; This first project. What? Sartorius will agree. Definitely. It&#39;s... anyway... a chance... - Do you believe that? &quot;No,&quot; he replied immediately. - But... what&#39;s the harm? I didn&#39;t want to agree too quickly, that&#39;s what I wanted. He was becoming my ally in the stalling game. &quot;I&#39;ll think about it,&quot; I said. &quot;I&#39;ll go then,&quot; he muttered, standing up. All his bones creaked as he rose from his chair. - So can you get yourself an encephalogram? he asked, rubbing the surface of his apron with his fingers as if trying to wipe an invisible stain off it. &quot;Okay,&quot; I said. Paying no attention to Harey (she was watching the scene silently with a book in her lap), he walked to the door. When it closed behind him, I stood up. I unfolded the piece of paper in my hand. The formulas were accurate. I didn&#39;t fake them. I just don&#39;t know if Siona would admit to my development. Probably not. I twitched. Harey came up behind me and touched my shoulder. - Kris! - What honey? - Who it was? - I told you. Dr. Snaut. - What kind of man is this? - I don&#39;t know much about him. Why are you asking? - That&#39;s how he looked at me... - He must have liked you. &quot;No,&quot; she shook her head. It wasn&#39;t that kind of look. He was looking at me like... like... She shuddered, looked up at me, then looked down at me. Let&#39;s go somewhere from here...