Sitting in front of the large window, I watched the ocean. I had nothing to do. The report, written in five days, was now a beam of waves racing through the void, somewhere beyond the constellation of Orion. When he reached the dark nebula, which absorbs all signals and light rays in a mass of eight trillion cubic miles, our report would be picked up by the first antenna in a chain of relays. Then, describing a gigantic arc, jumping from one radio buoy to another in leaps of billions of kilometres, the report would finally reach the last relay, a metal block stuffed with precision instruments; and the elongated beak of the retransmission antenna would pick up the beam of waves by concentrating it, to relaunch it in space, towards the Earth. Months would then pass, then a similar beam of energy, starting from the Earth, would dig a furrow of disturbances in the field of gravitation of the Galaxy; hitting the cosmic cloud head-on, it would continue its course without loss of speed, amplified by the long chain of free buoys which would direct it towards the two suns of Solaris. Under the red sun, the ocean was blacker than ever. A red mist veiled the horizon. The weather, exceptionally heavy, seemed to announce one of those terrible hurricanes which were unleashed two or three times a year on the surface of the planet, whose sole inhabitant - it is permitted to suppose - controlled the climate and ordered the storms. For months to come, I would stay there. From the height of my observatory, I would contemplate the birth of days – disc of white gold or faded purple. Sometimes I would surprise the rays of dawn playing among the fluid shapes of some building rising from the ocean, I would see the sun reflected on the silvery bubble of a symmetry; I would follow with my gaze the oscillations of the graceful agilus which bend in the wind and I would linger to examine the old dusty mimoids. And, one day, the screens of all the videophones would begin to flicker; all the signaling devices, dormant for a long time, would come back to life, revived by an impulse emitted hundreds of billions of kilometers away and announcing the arrival of a metallic colossus, which would descend towards us with the deafening noise of its gravitational forces. It would be the Ulysses, or the Prometheus, or some other cosmic cruiser. Through the hatch I would exit onto the flat roof of the Station; I would then see battalions of massive, white-shelled automatons, creatures foreign to original sin, who in their innocence go to the end of their task, not hesitating to destroy themselves or to destroy the unforeseen obstacle , strictly obeying the orders recorded by the crystals of their memory. Then, faster than sound, the ship would rise soundlessly, leaving far behind, above the ocean, a volley of detonations; and the faces of all the passengers would light up at the idea of returning home. The return home… But what did that mean for me? Earth ? I thought of those big, crowded, noisy cities where I would get lost, where I would get lost – I thought of those cities, as I had thought of the ocean, on the second or third night, when I had wanted to rush into black waves. I will drown among men. I will be silent and attentive – a valued companion. I&#39;ll have lots of connections, friends, and wives – and maybe even a wife. For a while, I will have to make an effort to smile, to bow, to stand up, to perform the thousand little gestures of which life on Earth is made up, while waiting for all these gestures to become reflexes again. I will find new interests, new occupations, to which I will not give myself entirely. No, never again will I give myself entirely to anything or anyone. And perhaps, at night, I will look in the direction of the dark nebula, black curtain which veils the brilliance of the two suns. And I&#39;ll remember everything, even what I&#39;m thinking at the moment; with a condescending smile, mingled with a little regret, I will remember my follies and my hopes. And this Kelvin of the future will be worth no less than the Kelvin of the past, which was ready to do anything in the name of an ambitious project, called Contact. And no one will have the right to judge me. Snaut entered the cabin. He looked around, then stopped looking at me. I got up and approached the table. - You need me ? - You have nothing to do ? he said. I could give you work… calculations. Oh, not a very urgent job ... I smile: - Thank you, it&#39;s not worth it. He was looking out the window: &quot;Are you quite sure of that?&quot; “Yeah…I was thinking about different things, and…” “I&#39;d rather you thought a little less. &quot;But you don&#39;t know what I was thinking!&quot; Tell me... do you believe in God? He gave me a worried look: - What? ... who still believes today ... I took a casual tone: - It&#39;s not that simple. This is not the traditional God of Earth religions. I am not a specialist in the history of religions and I may not have invented anything. Do you know, by any chance, if there ever was a faith in an imperfect God? He frowned. “Imperfect? What do you mean ? In some sense, the gods of all religions were imperfect, charged only with amplified human attributes. The God of the Old Testament, for example, demanded humble submission and sacrifices, he was jealous of other gods… The Greek gods, with their quarrelsome temper, their family disputes, were as imperfect as men. I interrupted him: — No, I&#39;m not thinking of a God whose imperfection results from the candor of his human creators, but whose imperfection represents the fundamental, immanent characteristic. A God limited in his omniscience and in his omnipotence, fallible, incapable of foreseeing the consequences of his acts, creating phenomena which engender horror. He is a God… crippled, whose ambitions exceed his strength, and who does not immediately realize it. A God who created clocks, but not the time they measure. He created systems, or mechanisms, serving definite ends, but which went beyond those ends and betrayed them. And he created eternity, which was to measure his power, and which measures his infinite defeat. Snaut hesitated, but there was no longer in his attitude the wary reserve he had been showing me lately: &#39;Manicheism used to be...&#39; I interrupted him immediately: &#39;Nothing in common with the principle of Good and Evil! This God doesn&#39;t exist outside of matter, he would like to free himself from matter, but he can&#39;t… Snaut thought for a moment: — I don&#39;t know of any such religion. This kind of religion was never…necessary. If I understand you, and I&#39;m afraid I understood you, you envision an evolving god, who develops over time, increases, and continues to increase his power by becoming aware of his powerlessness? For your God, the divine condition is a hopeless situation – and, having understood his situation, he despairs. Yes, but the desperate God, isn&#39;t it the man, my dear Kelvin? It&#39;s man you&#39;re talking to me about… and it&#39;s not just a damn philosophy, it&#39;s even a damn mysticism. I persisted: &#39;No, it&#39;s not about the man. It is possible that in some respects man fits this working definition, but that is because it has many gaps. Man, despite appearances, does not create goals. Time – the era – imposes them on him. Man can serve his time or revolt; but the object to which he devotes his care, or against which he rebels, is given to him from without. If there were only one man, he could apparently try the experiment of creating goals for himself in complete freedom - apparently, because the man who has not been brought up among other humans cannot become a male. And the one… the one I&#39;m thinking of… he can&#39;t exist in the plural, you understand? Snaut pointed to the window. &quot;Ah,&quot; he said, then. “No, neither does he. During his development, he undoubtedly came very close to the divine state, but he withdrew into himself too soon. He&#39;s more of an anchorite, a hermit of the cosmos, not a god… He repeats himself, Snaut, and the one I&#39;m thinking of would never repeat himself. It may have already been born somewhere, in a corner of the Galaxy, and soon, seized with a youthful intoxication, it will begin to extinguish stars, to light up others... We will notice it after some time. &quot;We&#39;ve noticed that before,&quot; Snaut said sourly. The novae and the supernovae… according to you, are these the candles of his altar? “If you take what I&#39;m saying literally…” “And Solaris may be the cradle of your divine infant,” Snaut added, his smile widening and the creases around his eyes multiplying. Solaris may be a first state of the despairing God... His intelligence may grow immensely... All the content of our solaristic libraries may just be the enormous repertoire of his infantile wail... I continued: &quot;And for a while we will have been the rattles of this baby!&quot; It&#39;s possible. And do you know what you just did? You&#39;ve created an entirely new Solaris-themed hypothesis – my compliments! Immediately, everything is explained, the impossibility of establishing contact, the absence of answers, certain… let&#39;s say certain extravagances in his behavior towards us; everything is explained by the psychology of a small child… Standing in front of the window, Snaut growled: — I renounce the paternity of the hypothesis… For a long time, we contemplated the black waves; a pale, elongated patch loomed to the east, in the mist that veiled the horizon. Without taking his eyes off the shimmering desert. Snaut suddenly asked, &quot;Where did you get this conception of an imperfect God?&quot; - I do not know. I find it very, very plausible. He is the only God I would believe in, a God whose passion is not redemption, a God who does not save anything, does not do anything – a God who simply is. “A mimoid,” Snaut whispered. - What are you saying ? Ah, yes, I had noticed that. A very old mimoid. Both of us were looking towards the misty horizon. Suddenly, I say: &quot;I&#39;m going out.&quot; I&#39;ve never left the Station before, it&#39;s a good opportunity. I&#39;ll be back in half an hour... Snaut&#39;s eyes widened. &quot;What?... you&#39;re going out... where are you going?&quot; I showed him the flesh-colored stain blurred by the mist: &#39;Over there. No impediment? I will take a small helicopter. I wouldn&#39;t want, when I return to Earth, to have to confess that I am a Solarist who has never set foot on Solaris! I opened the closet and started rummaging through the jumpsuits. Snaut watched me silently. Finally, he said: &#39;I don&#39;t like it. I had chosen a combination; I turned around: — What? - For a long time, I had not experienced such excitement. - What is troubling you ? Show off your cards! You&#39;re afraid that I... What an idea! I swear I don&#39;t mean…I didn&#39;t even think about it, no, really not! - I come with you. - Thank you, but I prefer to go out alone. – I was putting on the jumpsuit. “Do you realize, my first flight over the ocean…” Snaut muttered something, but I didn&#39;t understand what he was saying; I hurriedly completed my equipment. He accompanied me to the space station, helped me free the device from its stall and place it on the launch disc. As I was about to adjust the suit, he asked abruptly, &quot;Can I take your word for it?&quot; &quot;Good God, Snaut…again?&quot; Yes, you can take my word for it… Where are the oxygen tanks? He says nothing more. When I had closed the transparent dome, I waved to him. He started the elevator, and I emerged onto the roof of the Station. The motor awoke, hummed; the three-bladed propeller whirled. The craft rose, strangely light, and the Station quickly moved away. Alone above the ocean, I saw this one with new eyes. I was flying at low altitude – between forty and sixty meters. For the first time, I felt an impression, often described by explorers and which I had never felt while looking down from the top of the Station: the alternating movement which animated the shining waves did not evoke the undulations of the sea or the racing clouds, but an animal crawl – the incessant, extraordinarily slow contractions of muscular flesh secreting a crimson foam. As I began to turn, to steer toward the adrift mimoid, the sun struck me in the eye, and bloody lightning flashed on the curved windows; the black ocean, bristling with dark flames, was tinged with blue. The aircraft described too wide a curve and I was deported far downwind of the mimoid, a long irregular silhouette dominating the ocean. Freed from the mist, the mimoid was no longer pink, but grey-yellow; I lost sight of it for a moment and saw the Station, which seemed to be placed at ocean level and whose shape recalled an ancient zeppelin. I corrected the direction: the steep mass of the mimoid, baroque sculpture, grows in the line of sight. I was afraid of hitting the bulbous protuberances and I straightened the helicopter so abruptly that it, losing speed, began to pitch. My precaution had been useless, for the rounded tops of these whimsical towers were lowering. I adjusted my flight to the island&#39;s drift and slowly, meter by meter, I descended until I brushed against the eroded peaks. The mimoid was not large; from end to end it was three-quarters of a mile long, and a few hundred yards wide. In certain places, narrowings announced an approaching rupture. This mimoid was evidently a fragment of an incomparably larger formation. On a solarist scale, it was just a tiny shard, a shard, who knows how many weeks or months old. Among the veiny rocks overlooking the ocean, I discovered a sort of beach, an inclined and relatively flat surface – a few tens of square meters – towards which I pointed the camera. I landed, not without difficulty – the propeller had almost hit a cliff which had suddenly risen in front of me. I stopped the engine and lifted the cupola. Standing on the helicopter&#39;s fin, I checked that it was in no danger of slipping into the ocean; Fifteen paces from the aircraft, the waves licked the jagged shore, but the helicopter rested firmly on its circumflex legs. I jumped… to “earth”. The cliff I had nearly snagged was an enormous bony membrane pierced with holes, erect vertically and traversed by gnarled bulges. A breach, a few meters wide, split this wall at an angle and made it possible to examine the interior of the island, already glimpsed through the openings with which the cliff was pierced. I carefully hoisted myself onto the nearest ledge—my soles didn&#39;t slip, the suit didn&#39;t interfere with my movements. Continuing to climb, I found myself at a height of four stories above the ocean and could contemplate a wide expanse of the petrified landscape which was lost in the depths of the mimoid. I thought I saw the ruins of an archaic city, a centuries-old Moroccan city, shaken by an earthquake or some other cataclysm. I could make out a tangled network of winding alleys, clogged with rubbish, alleys that descended steeply towards the shore bathed in unctuous foam; further on stood intact battlements, bastions with bare buttresses; in the swollen, sagging walls there were black holes, remnants of windows or loopholes. This whole floating city, leaning heavily to one side, like a ship about to capsize, was sliding at random, very slowly turning on itself, as evidenced by the movement of the sun in the firmament; the shadows crawled lazily through the alleys of this ruined city, and from time to time a polished surface reflected a ray of light towards me. I took the risk of climbing higher, then I stopped: trickles of fine sand began to flow from the rocks above my head and, falling into the ravines and alleys, the cascades of sand bounced in whirlwinds of dust. The mimoid, of course, is not made of stone and all that is needed is to lift a &quot;rocky&quot; chip and any resemblance to limestone is dispelled; the material that makes up the mimoid, lighter than pumice stone, is made up of small cells and extremely porous. I was high enough to feel the movement of the mimoid. Not only did it advance, pushed by the black muscles of the ocean towards an unknown destination, but its inclination varied; it leaned now to one side, now to the other, and this languid rocking was accompanied by the light rustling of the yellow and gray foam which trickled along the emerged shore. This pendulum movement had been imprinted on the mimoid long before, no doubt at its birth, and the floating island, growing and breaking up, had retained the initial movement. Having examined everything in sight from my aerial observatory, I descended cautiously. And only then, strangely enough, did I realize that the mimoid didn&#39;t interest me at all, that I had flown here not to become acquainted with the mimoid, but to become acquainted with the ocean. With the helicopter a few feet behind me, I sat down on the rough, cracked beach. A heavy black wave washed over the lower shore and spread out, not black, but dirty green; as it receded, the wave left viscous streams, which flowed trembling towards the ocean. I moved closer to the edge, and when the next wave came, I stretched out my arm. Then there was faithfully reproduced a phenomenon already experienced by man a century earlier: the wave hesitated, retreated, then enveloped my hand, without however touching it, so that a thin layer of &quot;air&quot; separated my glove from this cavity, fluid a moment before and now really fleshy. Slowly, I raised my hand, and the wave, or rather this outgrowth of the wave, rose simultaneously, still enveloping my hand in a translucent cyst with greenish reflections. I stood up, so that I could raise my hand again; the gelatinous substance, following the movement of my hand, stretched like a rope, but did not break. The very mass of the wave, completely flat, clung to the shore and surrounded my feet (without touching them), like some strange beast patiently awaiting the end of the experience. From the ocean had sprung a flower, whose calyx molded my fingers. I stepped back. The rod vibrated, wavered, irresolute, and fell back; the wave picked her up and retreated. I repeated the game several times; and then – as the first experimenter had noticed a hundred years earlier – a wave came, which avoided me, indifferent, as if sated with a too well-known impression. I knew that to revive the &quot;curiosity&quot; of the ocean I would have to wait a few hours. I sat down again; I was no longer quite the same, disturbed by this phenomenon that I had provoked, and of which I had nevertheless read numerous descriptions; but no description could translate the experience as I had lived it. In all its movements, considered together or separately, each of these branches growing out of the ocean seemed to reveal a kind of cautious, but not shy, candor; a curiosity eager to know quickly, to understand a new, unexpected form; and a regret at having to withdraw, at not being able to cross the limits imposed by a mysterious law. What an inexpressible contrast between this alert curiosity and the shimmering immensity of the ocean that stretched out as far as the eye could see... Never before had I felt its gigantic presence, its powerful and uncompromising silence, this secret force which regularly animated the waves. Motionless, my gaze fixed, I plunged into a hitherto unknown universe of inertia, I slid down an irresistible slope, I identified with this fluid and mute colossus – as if I had forgiven him everything, without the slightest effort, without a word, without a thought. During the last week, I had behaved so well that Snaut had ceased to pursue me with his wary gaze. On the surface, I was calm; secretly, and without admitting it clearly, I was waiting for something. What ? His return ? How could I have expected his return? We all know that we are material beings, subject to the laws of physiology and physics, and the very force of all our feelings united cannot fight against these laws; we can only hate them. The immemorial faith of lovers and poets in the power of love, stronger than death, the age-old finis vitæ sed non amoris is a lie. A useless lie, and not even funny. So, resign yourself to the idea of being a clock measuring the passage of time, sometimes out of order, sometimes repaired, and whose mechanism, as soon as the builder sets it in motion, engenders despair and love? Resolve to the idea that each man relives old torments, all the more profound as they become more comical by repeating themselves? That human existence repeats itself, fine, but that it repeats itself like a worn-out song, like the record that a drunk keeps spinning by throwing a coin in the slot machine? I did not believe that this fluid colossus, which had caused the death of hundreds of men, with which the whole human species had been trying in vain for so many years to establish even the most tenuous relationships, this ocean which carried me caring about me except for a speck of dust, no, I didn&#39;t think he could be moved by the tragedy of two human beings. But his activities had a purpose… To be honest, I wasn&#39;t absolutely sure. But to leave was to give up a chance, perhaps negligible, perhaps only imaginary... Should we therefore continue to live here, among the furniture, the objects that we had both touched, in the air we had she breathed? In the name of what ? Hoping for his return? I expected nothing. And yet I lived in expectation – since she had disappeared, I was left with nothing but expectation. What accomplishments, what taunts, what tortures was I still waiting for? I didn&#39;t know it, I didn&#39;t know everything, and I persisted in the faith that the time for cruel miracles was not over.