The hallway was empty. I remained motionless for a moment behind the closed door. The groan of the wind enveloped the waterproof sheath of the hose. On the panel of the door, I saw, pasted askew, carelessly, a square of plaster, covered with an inscription in pencil: &quot;Man.&quot; I looked at that word, scribbled indistinctly, and wanted to go back to Snaut; I changed my mind. His demented warnings still vibrated in my ears. I walked down the passage, my shoulders bent under the weight of the suit. Softly, fleeing more or less consciously from some invisible observer, I returned to the rotunda; as I walked out of the hallway, I found two doors to my left and two doors to my right. I read the names of the occupants: Dr. Gibarian, Dr. Snaut, Dr. Sartorius. No plaque was attached to the fourth door. I hesitated, squeezed the handle gently, and slowly opened the door. By pushing the panel, I had the presentiment, almost the certainty, that there was someone in the room. I entered. There was nobody. A concave picture window, only slightly smaller than the one in the cabin where I&#39;d discovered Snaut, overlooked the ocean, which gleamed here—in the sun—with a greasy sheen, the waves seeming to secrete a reddish oil. Crimson reflections filled the whole room, the layout of which recalled a ship&#39;s cabin. On one side, surrounded by shelves laden with books, a mechanical bed had been pushed up against the wall; on the other side, between the numerous cupboards, hung nickel frames – series of aerial views, glued end to end with adhesive strips – and racks of test tubes and retorts, plugged with cotton swabs. In front of the window, two rows of white enamel boxes obstructed the passage. I lifted a few - 16 - lids; the boxes were stuffed with instruments of all kinds, interspersed with plastic pipes. In each corner, there was a faucet, a refrigeration installation, a demister. A microscope had been placed on the floor, for lack of space on the large table next to the window. Turning around, I saw near the front door a tall cupboard; it was ajar and contained coveralls, work coats, insulating aprons, linen, planetary exploration boots, polished aluminum cylinders – oxygen tanks for portable devices. Two of these devices, equipped with their masks, hung, hooked to the handle of the vertical bed. Everywhere was the same chaos, a disorder that we had rudely and hastily tried to hide. I sniffed the air; I smelled a faint odor of chemical reagents and traces of a more pungent odor – chlorine? Instinctively, I looked for the grilles of the air vents, under the ceiling; attached to the bars, ribbons of paper fluttered gently; the blowers were working, providing normal air circulation. I cleared two chairs laden with books, devices and tools that I put down at the other end of the room, piling them up as best I could, so as to leave a relatively free space around the bed, between the cupboard and bookcases. I pulled out a support to hang my diving suit on; I grabbed the end of the zipper, then unclenched my fingers. Held back by the confused idea that I was stripping myself of a shield, I couldn&#39;t make up my mind to abandon my diving suit. Again I looked around the room; I checked that the door was firmly closed, that it had no lock, and after a brief hesitation, I dragged some of the heaviest boxes to the threshold. Having thus temporarily barricaded myself, in three jerks I freed myself from my rattling carapace. A narrow mirror, set in a cupboard door, reflected part of the bedroom; out of the corner of my eye, I caught a moving shape; I jumped; but it was only my own reflection. The sweater under the diving suit was soaked with sweat. I pulled it out and pushed open a sliding wardrobe; it slid down the wall, revealing the shiny walls of a small bathroom. A flat, elongated box rested in the hollow of the shower basin. I carried the box without difficulty into the bedroom. When I put it back on the floor, a spring popped off the lid and I saw compartments, filled with strange objects: blanks of dark metal, grotesque replicas of the instruments contained in the cupboards. None of the instruments in the box were usable; they were blunted, atrophied, melted, as if emerging from a brazier. Stranger still, even the ceramic handles, practically non-fusible, had been deformed. No laboratory oven, heated to maximum temperature, could have melted them – perhaps an atomic battery. From the pocket of my suit, I pulled out a radiation counter, but the little black beak remained silent when I approached the debris. All I had on my body was a slip and a mesh swimsuit. I quickly pulled them off, throwing them away from me, and ran into the shower. The shock of the water was beneficial. Spinning under the hard, hot jet, I rubbed myself with excessive vigor, spattering the walls, expelling, stripping from my skin all that filth of troubled apprehensions that had permeated me since my arrival. I searched the closet and found a training suit, which could also be worn under the suit. As I was about to slip all of my meager possessions into a pocket, I felt a hard object stuck among the sheets of the notepad; it was a key, the key to my apartment, over there, on Earth; undecided, I turned the key between my fingers. Finally, I put it on the table. Suddenly it occurred to me that I would need a weapon. A pocketknife probably wasn&#39;t what I needed, but I didn&#39;t have anything else and I wasn&#39;t going to go looking for a radioactive gun or anything like that. I sat down on a tubular stool, in the middle of the empty space. I wanted to be alone. With satisfaction, I found that I had more than half an hour; by nature, I scrupulously respected my commitments, important or negligible. The hands of the clock – of which twenty-four signs divided the dial – indicated seven o&#39;clock. The sun - 18 - was going down. Seven o&#39;clock here was eight o&#39;clock aboard the Prometheus. Solaris, on Moddard&#39;s screens, was no more than an indistinct dust, confused with the stars. Well, what did the Prometheus matter to me? I closed my eyes. All I could hear was the groan of the pipes and a faint splash of water in the bathroom. Gibarian was dead. Shortly before, if I understood correctly. What had they done with his body? Had they buried him? No, on this planet it was impossible. I pondered the question for a long time, preoccupied exclusively with the fate of the corpse; then I realized the absurdity of my thoughts, I got up and started to walk up and down. With the tip of my foot, I bumped into a haversack emerging from a pile of books; I bent down, I picked it up. It contained a bottle of dark glass, a bottle so light it looked like it had been blown into paper. I examined it outside the window, in the purple glow of a gloomy twilight, invaded by mists of soot. What was happening to me? Why let myself be distracted by ramblings, or by the first knick-knack that came to hand? I started; the lamps had come on, controlled by a photoelectric cell; the sun had just set. What would happen ? I was so tense that the feeling of empty space behind me became unbearable. I decided to fight against myself. I pulled up a chair from the bookcase and selected a volume that had long been familiar to me, the second volume of Hughes and Eugel&#39;s old monograph, Historia Solaris. I leaned the big, solidly bound book on my knees; I started leafing through it. Solaris was discovered about a hundred years before I was born. The planet revolves around two suns – a red sun and a blue sun. No ship has approached the planet for forty years since its discovery. At that time, the Gamow-Shapley theory, stating that life was impossible on the satellite planets of two solar bodies, was held to be a certainty. The orbit is constantly - 19 - modified by the varying play of gravitation, during the revolution around the two suns. The orbit, because of the variations of gravitation, flattens or distends and the elements of life, if they appear, are infallibly destroyed, either by an intense radiation of heat, or by an extreme drop in temperature. These modifications occur in a time estimated in millions of years, therefore a very short time - according to the laws of astronomy or biology (evolution requires hundreds of millions, if not a billion of years). According to the first calculations, Solaris should in five hundred thousand years approach half of an astronomical unit of its red sun, and a million years later sink into the incandescent star. But, at the end of a few decades already, it seemed to be discovered that the orbit did not in any way show the expected modifications; it was stable, as stable as the orbits of the planets in our solar system. We began again, with extreme precision, the observations and calculations, which simply confirmed the first conclusions: the orbit of Solaris was unstable. A modest unit among the hundreds of planets discovered annually, to which the great statistics confined themselves to devoting a few lines defining the peculiarities of motion, Solaris rose little by little to the rank of celestial body worthy of more considerable attention. Four years after this promotion, flying over the planet with the Laakon and two auxiliary ships, Ottenskjold&#39;s expedition set out to study Solaris. This expedition had only the character of a preparatory reconnaissance, even improvised, the scientists not being equipped to land. Ottenskjold placed in equatorial and polar orbits a large number of automatic satellite-observatories, the main function of which was to measure gravitational potentials. In addition, the surface of the planet was studied, covered by an ocean dotted with innumerable islands in the configuration of a high plateau. – The total area of these islands is less than the area of Europe, although the diameter of - 20 - Solaris is one-fifth larger than that of the Earth. These stretches of rocky and desolate territory, irregularly distributed, are mainly grouped in the southern hemisphere. – The composition of the atmosphere, devoid of oxygen, was also analyzed and very precise measurements of the density of the planet were made, from which the albedo and other astronomical characteristics were determined. As expected, no trace of life was found, either on the islands or in the ocean. Over the next ten years, Solaris became the center of attraction for all observatories devoted to the study of that region of space; the planet, however, showed an astonishing tendency to maintain a gravitational orbit which, without a doubt, should have been unstable. The affair almost turned into a scandal; the results of the observations being bound to be inexact, attempts were made to overwhelm (for the good of science) certain scholars, or such computers which they used. Lack of funds delayed the start of a real Solarist expedition for three years. Finally, Shannahan, having completed his team, obtained from the Institute three units of tonnage C, the largest cosmic vessels of the time. A year and a half before the arrival of the expedition, which departed from alpha Aquarius, a second exploration fleet, acting on behalf of the Institute, had placed an automatic satellite, Luna 247, into solarist orbit. This satelloid, after three successive reconstructions, carried out several decades apart, still functions today. – The data provided by the satellite definitively confirmed the observations of the Ottenskjold expedition, concerning the active character of the movements of the ocean. One of Shannahan&#39;s ships remained in high orbit; the other two, after preliminary tests, landed on a rocky territory, about six hundred square miles, in the southern hemisphere of Solaris. The work of the expedition lasted eighteen months and was carried out under favorable conditions, except for a regrettable accident caused by the defective functioning of the apparatus. The team of scientists, however, split into two opposing camps - 21 - with the ocean being the subject of the dispute. Based on the analyses, it was assumed that the ocean was an organic formation (at that time, no one had yet dared to declare it alive). But, while biologists considered it a primitive formation - a kind of gigantic whole, a fluid cell, unique and monstrous (which they called &quot;prebiological formation&quot;), which surrounded the globe with a colloidal envelope reaching in places a a few miles thick – astronomers and physicists asserted that it must be an extraordinarily evolved organized structure; in their view, the ocean was perhaps even more complex than Earth&#39;s organic structures, since it was capable of effectively influencing the course of the planet&#39;s orbit. Indeed, no other cause had been discovered that could explain the behavior of Solaris; moreover, the planetophysicists had established a relation between certain processes of the plasmatic ocean and the gravitational potential measured locally, potential which modified in accordance with the “transformations of matter” of the ocean. So it was physicists, not biologists, who put forward this paradoxical formulation, &quot;plasma machine&quot;, meaning by this a formation perhaps deprived of life, according to our conceptions, but capable of undertaking useful activities - at the astronomical scale, we must hasten to add it. On the occasion of this quarrel – the turmoil of which, in a few weeks, reached the most eminent authorities – the doctrine of Gamow-Shapley, uncontested for eighty years, found itself shaken for the first time. Some still continued to support Gamow-Shapley&#39;s assertions that the ocean had nothing in common with life, that it was not a &quot;para&quot; or &quot;prebiological&quot; formation, but a geological formation, little current certainly, and capable only of stabilizing the orbit of Solaris, in spite of the variation of the forces of attraction; to support the argument, reference was made to Le Chatelier&#39;s law. - 22 - In contrast to this conservative attitude, new hypotheses were put forward – including that of Civito-Vitta, one of the most elaborate – proclaiming that the ocean was the result of a dialectical development: from its first form of pre-ocean, solution of slowly reacting chemical bodies, and by the force of circumstances (the changes of orbit threatening its existence), it had arrived in a single leap at the stage of &quot;homeostatic ocean&quot;, without going through all degrees of terrestrial evolution, avoiding the unicellular and multicellular phases, vegetable and animal evolution, the constitution of a nervous and cerebral system. In other words, and unlike terrestrial organisms, it had not adapted to its environment in a few hundred million years, to finally give birth to the first representatives of a species endowed with reason, but it had immediately dominated its environment. . The point of view was original; however, it was still unknown how this colloidal envelope could stabilize the orbit of the celestial body. For nearly a century, we have known devices capable of artificially creating fields of attraction and gravitation – gravitors; but no one was able to imagine how this formless glue could obtain an effect, which the gravitors caused by complicated nuclear reactions and extraordinarily high temperatures. The newspapers of that time, arousing the curiosity of the average reader and the anger of the scholar, were full of the most implausible fables on the subject of the &quot;Solaris mystery&quot;; one columnist went so far as to claim that the ocean was… a distant relative of our electric gymnotes! When, to some extent, the problem was unraveled, it turned out that the explanation - as often happened later in the field of solarist studies - replaced one enigma by another, perhaps even more surprising. The observations showed, at least, that the ocean did not act according to the laws of our gravitation (which, moreover, would have been impossible), but succeeded in directly imposing the periodicity of the course; this resulted in, among other things, deviations - 23 - in the measurement of time on one and the same meridian of Solaris. So not only did the ocean know, in a certain sense, the Einstein-Boevia theory; he also knew how to exploit the consequences (while we could not say the same). At the statement of this hypothesis, one of the most violent storms of the century was unleashed within the scholarly world. Venerable theories, universally accepted, crumbled: audaciously heretical articles invaded the specialized literature; &quot;brilliant ocean&quot; or &quot;gravitating colloid&quot;, the question ignited the spirits. This all happened several years before I was born. When I was a student - new data having been collected in the meantime - it was already generally accepted that life existed on Solaris, although limited to a single inhabitant... The second volume of Hughes and Eugel, which I continued to leaf through mechanically, began with a systematization as ingenious as it was amusing. The classification table had three definitions: Type – Polythera; Order – Syncytialia; Category – Shapeshifter. As if we knew of an infinite number of specimens of the species, when in reality there was only one – weighing, it is true, seven hundred billion tons. Under my fingers fluttered colorful figures, picturesque graphs, analytical records and spectral diagrams, exposing the type and rate of fundamental transformations as well as chemical reactions. Quickly, infallibly, the thick volume led me to the solid ground of mathematical faith. It could be concluded that we had acquired full knowledge of this representative of the Metamorph category, which extended a few hundred meters under the metallic hull of the Station, veiled at this moment by the shadows of a night which would last four hours. In reality, not everyone was yet convinced that the ocean was actually a living “creature” and even less, it goes without saying, that it was endowed with reason. I put the big book back on the shelf and picked up the next volume. It was divided into two parts. The first was devoted to a summary of countless attempts, all of which were aimed at establishing contact with the ocean. At the time of my studies, I remembered it perfectly, this establishment of contact was the object of anecdotes, of jokes and endless jeers; compared to the abundance of speculation aroused by this problem, medieval scholasticism seemed a model of luminous evidence. The second part, nearly one thousand three hundred pages, included only the bibliography relating to the subject. The texts could not have found a place in the room where I was standing. The first attempts at contact were attempted through specially designed electronic devices, which transformed the stimuli, emitted bilaterally. The ocean participated actively in these operations, since it fashioned the devices. All of this, however, remained obscure. What exactly was this &quot;participation&quot;? The ocean modified certain elements of the submerged instruments; consequently, the planned rhythm of the discharges was upset and the recording devices reproduced a multitude of signals, fragmentary testimonies of some fantastic activity, escaping in fact all analysis. Did this data reflect a momentary state of stimulation, or constant impulses, related to the gigantic structures that the ocean was creating somewhere, at the antipodes of the region where the researchers were? Had electronic devices recorded the impenetrable manifestation of the venerable secrets of this ocean? Had he given us his masterpieces? How to know ! The stimulus had not provoked two identical reactions. Sometimes the devices failed to burst under the violence of the impulses, sometimes there was absolute silence. In short, it was impossible to obtain the repetition of any manifestation previously observed. Constantly, it seemed as if one were on the verge of deciphering the growing mass of recorded clues; Hadn&#39;t electronic brains of practically unlimited information capacity been built for this purpose, such as no other problem had required until then? In fact, we got results. The ocean – source of electrical, magnetic and gravitational impulses – expressed itself in a kind of mathematical language; also, by appealing to one of the most abstract branches of analysis, the law of large numbers, it was possible to classify certain frequencies of current discharges; structural homologies appeared, already observed by physicists in the branch of science which takes into consideration the reciprocal relations of energy and matter, of components and compounds, of the finite and the infinite. This correspondence convinced the scientists that they were in the presence of a monster endowed with reason, a protoplasmic brain ocean, enveloping the whole planet and wasting its time in extravagant theoretical considerations of universal reality; our devices, by surprise, had seized the tiny snippets of a formidable monologue, which unfolded eternally in the depths of this disproportionate brain and which, necessarily, exceeded our understanding. So much for mathematicians. These hypotheses, according to some, underestimated the possibilities of the human mind; they bowed before the unknown, proclaiming an old doctrine, insolently exhumed, ignoramus et ignorabimus. Others thought that the hypotheses of mathematicians were sterile and dangerous drivel, because they helped to create a contemporary mythology, based on the giant brain - electronic or plasma, it doesn&#39;t matter - considered as the ultimate objective of the existence and sum of life. Still others… but scholars were legion and everyone had their opinion. If one compared the area of &quot;contact&quot; testing with the other branches of solarist studies, where specialization had developed strongly, particularly during the last quarter of a century, one found that a cybernetic solarist had difficulty in be heard by a symmetryadologist solarist. Veubeke, director of the Institute at the time of my studies, had asked one day, jokingly: &quot;How do you want to communicate with the ocean, when you yourself - 26 - can no longer understand yourself?&quot; The joke contained a fair amount of truth. There was nothing arbitrary about putting the ocean in the Shapeshifter category. Its undulating surface could give rise to extremely diverse formations, unlike anything seen on Earth, and the function - process of adaptation, recognition or otherwise - of these sudden eruptions of plasma &quot;creativity&quot; remained a riddle. Lifting the heavy volume with both hands, I put it back on the shelf and I said to myself that our scholarship, all the information accumulated in the libraries, was only a useless jumble, a quagmire of testimonies and suppositions, and that we had not progressed an inch since the beginning of the research, seventy-eight years earlier; that the situation was much worse than in the days of the pioneers, since the assiduous efforts of so many years had not resulted in any indisputable certainty. All of our precise knowledge was strictly negative. The ocean did not use machines; in certain circumstances, however, he seemed able to build them; during the first and second year of the exploration work, he had reproduced the elements of a few submerged devices; thereafter, he purely and simply ignored the experiments which we pursued with Benedictine patience, as if he had lost all interest in our instruments and our activities (as if, consequently, he had lost interest in us). It had no nervous system – I continue to paint the picture of our “negative knowledge” – nor cells, and its structure was not protean. He did not always react to even the most powerful stimuli (he completely &quot;ignored&quot;, for example, the catastrophic accident that occurred during Giese&#39;s second expedition; an auxiliary rocket, falling from a height of three hundred thousand meters, crashed on the surface of the planet, the radioactive explosion of its nuclear reserves destroying the plasma within a radius of two thousand five hundred meters). - 27 - Gradually, in scholarly circles, people came to judge the “Solaris affair” as a “lost game”; in particular among the administrators of the Institute, where voices had been raised recently, suggesting to cut the credits and to suspend research. Nobody, until then, had dared to speak of a definitive liquidation of the Station; such a decision would have too obviously meant defeat. Moreover, during unofficial talks, many of our scholars advocated abandoning the &quot;Solaris affair&quot; along a line of retreat as &quot;honourable&quot; as possible. Many scientists, however, especially among the young, imperceptibly came to regard &quot;business&quot; as a touchstone of individual values. “All things considered,” they said, “the challenge is not just to break into Solarist civilization; it is essentially about us, about the limits of human knowledge. For a time the opinion prevailed (spread zealously by the daily press) that the &quot;thinking ocean&quot; of Solaris was a gigantic brain, prodigiously developed, and millions of years ahead of our own civilization. , a kind of &quot;cosmic yogi&quot;, a sage, a representation of omniscience, who had long since understood the vanity of all activity and who, for this reason, now entrenched himself in an unshakeable silence. The opinion was incorrect, for the living ocean acted; not, of course, according to human notions; he did not build cities or bridges, he did not build flying machines; he did not try to abolish distances and was not concerned with the conquest of space (decisive criterion, according to some, of the incontestable superiority of man). The ocean gave itself up to innumerable transformations, to an “ontological self-metamorphosis” – scholarly terms are not lacking in the list of solarist activities! On the other hand, any scientist attaching himself to the study of the multiple solariana experiences the irresistible impression that he perceives the fragments of an intelligent construction, genius perhaps, mixed without order with absurd productions, apparently engendered by the delirium. Thus was born, contrary to the “ocean-yogi” conception, the idea of the “ocean-moron”. These hypotheses unearth one of the oldest philosophical problems – the relationship of matter and spirit, of spirit and consciousness. Du Haart was not lacking in audacity when he was the first to claim that the ocean was endowed with consciousness. The problem, which methodologists hastened to declare metaphysical, gave rise to a good deal of discussion and dispute. Was it possible that thought was deprived of consciousness? Besides, could we call thought the processes observed in the ocean? Is a mountain a very big rock? Is a planet a huge mountain? We remained free to choose our terminology, but the new scale of magnitude introduced new standards and new phenomena. The question presented itself as a contemporary transposition of the problem of squaring the circle. Every independent thinker strove to cram his personal contribution into the treasury of solarist studies. New theories abounded: the ocean bore witness to a state of degeneration, of regression, following a phase of “intellectual plenitude”; it was a wandering neoplasm from the bodies of the previous inhabitants of the planet, all of which he had devoured, swallowed up, and whose residues he had melted into this eternal, self-reproducing form of supercellular element. In the white light of the fluorescent tubes, a pale imitation of the clarity of an earthly day, I cleared the table of the appliances and the books that cluttered it; on the plastic tray, I unrolled the map of Solaris and stared at it, arms outstretched, hands resting on the chrome edge of the table. The living ocean had its shoals and its trenches; its islands, covered with a decaying mineral deposit, were certainly of the nature of the ocean floor – did it order the eruption and subsidence of the rock formations buried in its abyss? No one knew. Considering the large flat projection of the two hemispheres, mottled with various shades of blue and violet, I felt that poignant astonishment which had often seized me, and which I had experienced as a child, at school, on learning the existence of Solaris. Lost in contemplation of this stunning map, I thought of nothing, no more of the mystery surrounding Gibarian&#39;s death than of the uncertainty of my own future. The different sections of the ocean bore the names of the scientists who had explored them. I was studying the bulge of Thexall, which bathed the equatorial archipelagos, when I had the sudden sensation that someone was looking at me. I was leaning over the map, but I couldn&#39;t see it anymore; an invincible numbness seized all my limbs. Boxes and a small cupboard barricaded the door in front of me. It&#39;s a robot, I told myself – though I hadn&#39;t found any in the room, and none could have entered without my knowledge. On my neck and back, the skin began to burn; the weight of that heavy, motionless gaze became unbearable. My head buried in the crook of my shoulders, I leaned harder and harder against the table, which began to slide slowly; this movement freed me; I pivoted. The room was empty. Ahead of me was only the wide arched window, and the night beyond. But the same feeling persisted. The night looked at me, the amorphous night, blind, immense, without borders. No star lit the darkness behind the glass. I drew the opaque curtains. I had not spent an hour in the Station and already I was showing morbid signs. Was it an effect of Gibarian&#39;s death? As I knew him, I had judged until then that nothing could ever have troubled his mind. I wasn&#39;t so sure anymore. I was standing in the middle of the room, next to the table. My breathing calmed down; I felt the sweat cool on my forehead. What had I been thinking a moment ago? Ah, yes – to the robots! I was surprised not to have met any, anywhere. Where had they all gone? The only one I had contact with – by far – belonged to the vehicle reception services. But the others? I looked at my watch. It was time to join Snaut. I went out. Luminous filaments, running under the ceiling, dimly lighted the rotunda. I approached Gibarian&#39;s door and stood motionless for a long time. Silence, silence everywhere. I squeezed the handle. In reality, I had no intention of entering. The handle lowered, the door moved aside, revealing a black slit; then the lamps came on. I quickly crossed the threshold and quietly closed the door. Then I turned around. Shoulders, I brushed the panel of the door. The room was bigger than mine; a curtain dotted with small pink and blue flowers, no doubt brought from Earth with personal effects and not provided for in the Station&#39;s equipment, veiled three-quarters of the panoramic window. Along the walls were rows of shelves, separated by cupboards, both varnished in pale green enamel with silver reflections. The bookcases and cupboards had been emptied of their contents, which piled up in heaps between the stools and the armchairs. At my feet, blocking the way, two rolling tables were overturned, buried under a heap of periodicals escaping from stuffed briefcases, which had burst. Books, the leaves fanned out, were smeared with multicolored liquids, which had been spilled by breaking retorts and flasks with corroded stoppers, glass containers so thick that a simple fall, even from a considerable height, could thus have smashed them. Beneath the window lay a desk, dwarfing a swing-arm task lamp. Two legs of an overturned stool sank into the half-open drawers. A veritable tide of papers of all sizes, covered with handwritten characters, drowned the floor. I recognized Gibarian&#39;s handwriting and leaned forward. As I lifted the loose sheets, I noticed that my hand cast a double shadow. I sat up. The pink curtain blazed, crossed by an incandescent line of bluish white which was widening. I lifted the curtain – an unbearable conflagration spread across the horizon, driving away an army of spectral shadows, rising from between the waves and stretching towards the Station. It was dawn. After the one-hour nocturnal interlude, the planet&#39;s second sun, the blue sun, rose in the sky. When I returned to my pile of papers, the automatic switch turned off the lights. I came across the precise description of an experiment, decided upon three weeks before; Gibarian intended to expose the plasma to extremely intense X-ray radiation. From the content of the text, I understood that it was intended for Sartorius, who was to organize the operations; I was holding a copy of the project in my hand. The whiteness of the sheets hurt my eyes. This new day was different from the previous one. In the warm light of the orange sun, red mists hovered above the black ocean with bloody reflections and almost constantly veiled the waves, the clouds, the sky with a crimson screen. Now the blue sun was piercing the flower-printed fabric with quartz light. My tanned hands looked gray. The room had changed; all objects with red reflections had faded, had turned gray-brown, while white, green and yellow objects had acquired a more vivid luster and seemed to emit their own light. Blinking, I risked another peek through the slit in the curtain. A stretch of fluid metal vibrated and throbbed under a sky of white flames. I lowered my eyes and stepped back. On the sink shelf (the edge of which was chipped) I found a pair of large dark glasses; they covered half of my face. The curtain was now radiating sodium light. I continued to read, picking up the pages and placing them on the only table that remained usable. The text had gaps; I rummaged through the scattered pages in vain. Getting my hands on reports of experiments already undertaken, I learned that for four consecutive days Gibarian and Sartorius had subjected the ocean to radiation at a point fourteen hundred miles from the present position of the Station. . However, the use of X-rays was prohibited by a UN convention, because of their harmful action, and I was certain that no one had transmitted any request to the Earth, asking for authorization to proceed with such experiences. Raising my head, I saw my image in the mirror of a half-open wardrobe door, a pale face, masked by dark glasses. The room, all in white and blue reflections, looked odd, too. But soon I heard a prolonged creaking and external, airtight shutters slid in front of the window. There was a moment of darkness, then the lamps came on, which seemed strangely dim to me. It was getting hotter and hotter; the steady flow of air conditioning units sounded like an exasperated yelp. The Station&#39;s refrigeration equipment was working at full capacity. However, the oppressive heat kept rising. I heard footsteps. Someone was walking in the rotunda. In two silent leaps, I was near the door. The footsteps slowed down; the stranger was behind the door. The handle lowered; without thinking, mechanically, I seize it; the pressure did not increase, it did not weaken. No one on either side of the door raised their voices. Each holding the handle, we stayed like that for a while. Suddenly, the handle straightened, slipping out of my hands. The footsteps, muffled, receded. I listened again, my ear glued to the panel; I heard nothing more.