I followed a long deserted corridor, then I turned right. I had never stayed at the Station; but on Earth, in training, I had lived six weeks in the Station&#39;s exact replica; I knew where the little aluminum staircase led. The library was not lit. Groping, I found the switch. I consulted the map library; having composed the numbers for the first volume of the Yearbook of Solarist Studies and the supplement, I pressed the computer key; a red light came on. I looked at the register: the two books were with Gibarian, as well as the Petit Apocryphe. I turned off the light and went back downstairs. Despite the footsteps I had heard receding, I was afraid to return to Gibarian&#39;s. She could come back. I stood behind the door for a long time. Finally, pressing the handle, I forced myself to enter. There was no one in the room. I began to turn over the books scattered in front of the window, interrupting my research for a moment to close the cupboard; I suffered to see the empty space in the middle of the combinations. The supplement was not under the window and I began to methodically lift the books, one after the other, all around the room; when I had reached the last heap, between the bed and the cupboard, I discovered the volume I was looking for. I was hoping to find a mark and, indeed, a bookmark was slipped between the pages of the index; a name, which I did not know, had been underlined in red pencil. André Berton. The numbers next to the name referred the reader to two different chapters. I glanced at the first reference and learned that Berton was a reserve pilot on Shannahan&#39;s ship. The next reference appeared about a hundred pages later. At first the expedition acted with extreme caution; then, sixteen days having elapsed, it appeared that the plasmatic ocean not only showed no sign of aggression, but evaded all direct contact with apparatus and men, recoiling whenever any body whatsoever approached its surface; also, Shannahan and his substitute, Timolis, renounced some of the precautions which hindered and delayed the course of the work. The expedition then split into small groups of two or three men, making flights over the ocean within a radius, sometimes, of a few hundred miles. The radiant ramps, previously used to delimit and protect the works, were transported to the base. Four days passed, without the slightest accident, except for some damage to the equipment ensuring the oxygen supply to the suits; the atmosphere exerted an exceptionally corrosive action on the valves, which had to be replaced almost daily. On the morning of the fifth day, that is to say the twenty-first day since the arrival of the expedition, two scientists, Carucci and Fechner (the first was a radiobiologist, the second a physicist), set out to explore above of the ocean. They were sailing on board an airmobile – not a flying vehicle, but a glider, moving on a cushion of compressed atmosphere. Six hours later, the two explorers were not back. Timolis, who was running the base in Shannahan&#39;s absence, sounded the alarm and organized the search, calling on all available men. By a fatal coincidence, the radio link that day had been cut an hour after the exploration parties had left – a large patch had obscured the red sun, which bombarded the upper layers of the atmosphere of a very dense shot of energetic particles. Only the devices transmitting on ultra-short waves continued to operate, limiting contact to a radius of twenty-something miles. To make matters worse, the fog thickened before sunset and the search had to be interrupted. As the rescue parties returned to base, a helicopter spotted the airmobile just eighty miles from the command ship. The engine was running and the aircraft, apparently undamaged, was holding above the waves. In the translucent cabin there was only one man, half conscious – Carucci. The airmobile was conveyed to the base. Carucci received medical attention and quickly regained consciousness. He was unable to say anything about Fechner&#39;s disappearance. He only remembered that he himself had been overcome with suffocation when they had decided to return. The valve of his oxygen apparatus had failed and toxic gases, in small quantities, penetrated inside the suit. Fechner, struggling to repair Carucci&#39;s device, had been forced to unhook his seatbelt and stand up. It was the last thing Carucci remembered. According to the opinion of specialists, it was possible to establish the sequence of events. To repair Carucci&#39;s device, Fechner had opened the roof of the cabin, because the low dome hindered its movements - an admissible procedure, the cabin of these vehicles not being airtight and constituting a simple screen against atmospheric infiltration and the wind. . While Fechner was busy with his companion, his own oxygen apparatus had probably also suffered damage; and Fechner, no longer knowing what he was doing, had climbed to the top of the carcass, whence he had fallen into the ocean. Fechner was therefore the first victim of the ocean. They searched for his body – the suit should have survived – without result. Besides, perhaps the diving suit was floating somewhere; the expedition was unable to meticulously search the vast expanses of a rolling desert, covered in shreds of mist. By dusk – I&#39;m picking up the story at the end of this twenty-first day – all the rescue vehicles had returned to the base, with the exception of a large supply helicopter, in which Berton had flown away. Berton&#39;s helicopter reappeared an hour after dark, when serious concerns were beginning to arise. Berton was obviously suffering from nervous concussion; he freed himself from his device and immediately began to run in all directions like a maniac; they mastered it; he cried and wept; it was astounding to say the least from a man with seventeen years of cosmic navigation and more than one flight in very arduous conditions. The doctors assumed that Berton, too, had absorbed poisonous gases. However, having regained some semblance of balance, Berton refused to leave, even for a moment, the interior of the base, and even to approach the window overlooking the ocean. After two days, he asked permission to dictate a report about his flight; he insisted on the importance of the revelations he was about to make. The council of the expedition studied the report and concluded with the morbid creation of a spirit intoxicated by the harmful gases of the atmosphere; the alleged revelations concerned, not the history of the expedition, but the development of Berton&#39;s disease; so it was deemed superfluous to mention them. That&#39;s what the supplement said. I tell myself that Berton&#39;s report must in any case deliver a key to the mystery – what event could have shaken a spaceflight veteran to such an extent? I again undertook to turn the books upside down, but the Little Apocrypha could not be found. I felt more and more tired; I postponed further research until the next day and left the room. Passing the foot of a staircase, I saw specks of light spreading from top to bottom of the aluminum steps. Sartorius was still working! I decided to go see him. Upstairs it was warmer. A slight current of air was blowing, however, and the strips of paper were moving frantically at the grille of the ventilation openings. The hallway was low and wide. A thick sheet of frosted glass, in a chrome doorway, enclosed the main laboratory. Inside, a dark curtain veiled the door; light fell from the pierced windows above the lintel. I squeezed the handle; the door didn&#39;t yield – I had foreseen it. No other sound came from the lab except an intermittent chirp – like the hiss of a malfunctioning gas burner. I knocked; no answer. I called: &quot;Sartorius!&quot; Dr. Sartorius! It&#39;s me, Kelvin, the new one! I need to see you, please open the door! There was a rustle of crumpled papers. &quot;It&#39;s me, Kelvin!&quot; You have heard of me! I arrived from Prometheus a few hours ago! “I was screaming, my lips glued to the corner where the door clung to the metal jamb. &quot;Dr. Sartorius!&quot; I am alone. Please open up! Not a word. Then the same rustle as before. Then, the rattling of steel instruments being placed on a tray. Then…I couldn&#39;t believe my ears…a series of tiny steps, the trotting of a child, the tight, hasty stamping of a pair of tiny legs. Did remarkably nimble fingers imitate this gait by tapping the lid of an empty box? I yelled, &quot;Dr. Sartorius, are you opening the door or not?&quot; No response, only the trotting of a child and, simultaneously, the footsteps of a man walking on tiptoe. But, if this man moved, he could not at the same time imitate the gait of a child! Besides, it didn&#39;t matter to me… Without containing the rage that was invading me, I burst out: — Dr. Sartorius! I did not undertake a journey of sixteen months to come and amuse myself with your comedies! I count to ten. If you don&#39;t open, I&#39;ll break down the door! I doubted, moreover, to easily force this door… and the discharge of a gas pistol is not very powerful. Yet I was determined to carry out my threat, one way or another, even if I had to resort to explosives, which I would no doubt find in quantity in the warehouse stores. I couldn&#39;t allow myself to give in, that is to say, I couldn&#39;t continue to play a fool&#39;s game with the fake cards that the situation put in my hand. There was a sound of struggle. Or simply repelled objects? The curtain split in the middle and a slender shadow cast itself on the frosted glass, which the light frosted around. A hoarse, high-pitched voice spoke, &quot;I&#39;ll open the door, but you have to promise me you won&#39;t come in.&quot; - In that case, why open! &quot;I&#39;ll be going out.&quot; - Good. I promise. The figure stepped back and the curtain was carefully closed. Confused operations were taking place inside the laboratory. I heard scraping – was it a table scraping the floor? Finally, the lock clicked, the pane of glass slid aside, and Sartorius slipped into the hallway. He leaned against the door. He was very tall, thin, all bony under his whitish sweater. Around his neck he had tied a black scarf. Over his arm, folded in half, he wore a laboratory coat, burnt by the reagents. His extraordinarily narrow head was tilted to one side. I couldn&#39;t see his eyes; dark, arched glasses covered half of his face. The lower jaw was elongated; he had blue lips and huge ears, also bluish. He hadn&#39;t shaved. Anti-radiation gloves, red gloves, tied with laces, hung from his wrists. We stood for a moment looking at each other with undisguised aversion. His shaggy hair (he had obviously shaved it himself) was the color of lead; the beard repelled salt and pepper. Like Snaut, his forehead was burnt, but only halfway up, and pale above a horizontal line; he had to wear a kind of skullcap when he was exposed to the sun. &quot;I&#39;m listening,&quot; he said. I got the feeling he didn&#39;t care what I had to say to him; tense and still glued to the glass plate, he was attentive above all to what was happening behind him. For fear of letting go of a folly, I did not know at first what to say; I began, “My name is Kelvin…you&#39;ve probably heard of me. I am, or rather I was, Gibarian&#39;s collaborator. His lean face, all vertical lines – that&#39;s how I imagined Don Quixote – was devoid of expression. And the black mask didn&#39;t help me find the words. &#39;I heard that Gibarian… was dead. – I interrupted myself. - Yes. I listen. The voice betrayed impatience. &quot;Did he commit suicide?&quot; Who found the body, was it you or Snaut? &quot;Why are you talking to me?&quot; Didn&#39;t Doctor Snaut tell you? “I wanted to hear what you had to say about this case. “You studied psychology, Dr. Kelvin, didn&#39;t you? - Yes. Well ? &quot;Do you serve science?&quot; - Yes of course. What report ... - You are not commissioner or inspector of the judicial police. It is now two forty and, instead of devoting yourself to your task, to the work that is assigned to you here, not content with forcing the door of my laboratory, you question me as if I were a suspect. Sweat oozed down his forehead. I mastered myself with an effort; in a muffled voice, I said: &quot;You are a suspect, Dr. Sartorius!&quot; I tried to reach him at all costs and I added, furious: - Besides, you know it perfectly! “Kelvin, if you don&#39;t recant and apologize to me, I&#39;ll file a complaint against you over the radio. &quot;Why would I apologize to you?&quot; Because you lock yourself up and barricade yourself in this lab, instead of coming to greet me, instead of letting me know honestly about what&#39;s going on here? Have you completely lost your mind? And you, yes, who are you? A scholar or a wretched capon? Answer! I don&#39;t know what I was screaming again. He didn&#39;t even flinch. Large drops ran down her cheeks with dilated pores. Suddenly I understood: he hadn&#39;t heard me! With both hands clasped behind his back, with all his might he held the door, which was swinging as if someone on the other side had pulled the panel. In a strange, high-pitched voice, he moaned: &quot;Go away!&quot; I&#39;m begging you… for God&#39;s sake, go! Come down, I&#39;ll join you, I&#39;ll do whatever you want, but I&#39;m begging you, go! His voice betrayed such exhaustion that I mechanically stretched out my arms, wanting to help him hold that door open; he then let out a howl of horror, as if I had pointed a knife in his direction. I began to step back, while he shouted in his falsetto voice: &quot;Go, go!&quot; I&#39;m coming back, I&#39;m coming back, I&#39;m coming back! No no ! He opened the door a crack and rushed inside. It seemed to me that a yellow object, a shiny disk, shone for a moment across his chest. A dull murmur was now coming from the laboratory; the curtain flew aside; a large shadow cast itself on the glass screen, then the curtain fell again and I saw nothing more. What was going on in the room? Footsteps hit the ground, a mad pursuit ensued, followed by a terrible crash of glass and I heard a child&#39;s laughter… My legs were wobbling; I stared at the door with haggard eyes. Silence had succeeded the uproar. I sat down on the plastic edge of a window. I sat there, maybe a quarter of an hour, I don&#39;t know, waiting for something, or just so stunned that I didn&#39;t want to get up. My head was exploding. I heard a continuous creak and an increased light shone on the landing. From my seat, I could see only part of the circular corridor that surrounded the laboratory. This was located at the top of the Station, under the very carapace of the upper frame, so the walls were concave and inclined, with oblong windows a few meters apart. The exterior shutters were up, the blue day was coming to an end. A blinding glare pierced the thick panes. Every nickel-plated rod, every latch blazed. The door to the lab—that big, rough pane of glass—streamed pale sparks. I looked at my hands, resting on my knees, and turning gray in this spectral light. My right hand was holding the gas pistol – I hadn&#39;t realized it, I hadn&#39;t known that I had pulled the pistol from its scabbard. I sheathed it. I knew now that even a radioactive spear wouldn&#39;t have helped me much. What use would it have served me? To attack the door, to storm the laboratory? I got up. The solar disc, like an explosion of hydrogen, plunged into the ocean and penetrated me with a jet of horizontal, almost tangible rays. When the rays hit my cheek (I was going down the stairs), I felt them like a burning imprint. Halfway up the stairs, I paused to think and climbed the steps again. I walked around the lab. As I said, the corridor surrounded him entirely; after having covered a hundred steps, I found myself in front of a second glass door, exactly like the other. I didn&#39;t try to open it; I knew it was closed. I scanned the wall, looking for a window, some slot; the idea of spying on Sartorius had come to me quite naturally and without shame. I wanted to get rid of the assumptions and know the truth, a truth that in advance I imagined incomprehensible. I noticed that the rooms of the laboratory were lit by ceiling windows, arranged at the top of the carapace which enveloped the Station; from the outside, it would therefore be possible to spy on Sartorius. To start, I had to go down, equip myself with a diving suit and an oxygen apparatus. At the top of the stairs, I hesitated; these snuffboxes were probably ground glass slabs. But I wanted to see the laboratory, and no other solution presented itself… I returned to the middle floor. The door to the radio booth was open. Snaut, slumped in his chair, was asleep. At the sound of my footsteps, he jumped and opened his eyes. “Hi, Kelvin! he said hoarsely. As I remained silent, he asked: &#39;So you learned something?&#39; - Yes ... he is not alone. Snaut grimaced, “Ah, really? Indeed, it is something. Does he have visitors? Almost involuntarily, I replied: - I do not understand why you do not want to tell me what it is. Since I&#39;m staying here, sooner or later I&#39;ll learn the truth. Why these mysteries? &quot;When you yourself have received visitors, you will understand.&quot; It seemed to me that my presence bothered him and that he did not want to continue the conversation. I went out. - Where are you going ? I did not answer. The space station was just as I left it. My charred capsule stood gaping on its base. I approached the locker room where the suits were lined up. But suddenly I lost interest in this escapade on the surface of the shell. I turned around and went down a spiral staircase, which led to the warehouse stores. Downstairs, heaps of bottles and crates filled the cramped hallway. Plates of bare metal, with bluish reflections, lined the walls. A few more steps, and under an arch appeared the frosty pipes of the refrigeration plant. At the end of the corridor, they engulfed themselves in a sleeve with a large plastic neck. When I opened the heavy door, two inches thick and sheathed in insulating foam, an icy cold penetrated me. I shivered. I was standing at the threshold of a cave cut in an ice floe, with sculpted reliefs in the shape of large coils, from which stalactites of ice hung. Here too, buried under a layer of snow, there were crates, space capsules; side shelves were laden with translucent boxes and bags containing oily yellow matter. The vault was lowering; a shimmering curtain of frost hid the bottom of the cave. I parted the curtain. A large, elongated body, covered in canvas, rested on an aluminum grid. I lifted the edge of the tarp and saw Gibarian&#39;s frozen face. The straight black hair, barred with a gray streak, clung tightly to the skull. The cartilages of the throat protruded in a ridge in the middle of the neck. The dull eye stared fixedly at the vault, a tear of opaque ice clinging to the corner of the eyelids. The cold was so brutal that I had to grit my teeth to keep them from chattering. Supporting the shroud with one hand, I brushed Gibarian&#39;s cheek with the other. I thought I touched a trunk of petrified wood, bristling with black, prickly hairs. The curve of the lips expressed an infinite, disdainful patience. Letting go of the canvas, I noticed, protruding from between the folds, five black pearls arranged in order of size. I stiffened. I had recognized fingers, the oval pads of the toes of a bare foot; beneath the crumpled shroud, flattened against Gibarian&#39;s body, lay the black woman. Slowly, I removed the tarp. The head, helmeted with frizzy hair, twisted into little tufts, rested in the crook of a massive black arm. The back shone, tense at the edge of the vertebrae. No movement animated this colossal body. I examined the soles of the bare feet again and found that they were not flattened or deformed by the weight they had to bear; that the walk had not hardened the skin, as intact and soft as the skin of the hands or the shoulders. With more difficulty than I had had in touching Gibarian&#39;s corpse, I forced myself to touch one of those bare feet. I then made another incredible observation: this body, abandoned in a freezer, this body lived and moved. The woman had withdrawn her foot, like a sleeping dog whose paw has been grabbed. I confusedly thought: “She&#39;s going to freeze…” But the body, having become peaceful again, was warm and I had felt the regular beating of the pulse in the pads of the toes. I stepped back, the curtain fell; I left hastily. Coming out of the white grotto, the heat seemed stifling to me. I followed the corridor and climbed the stairs, which brought me back to the space station. I sat on the rings of a coiled parachute; I took my head in my hands. I was knocked out. My thoughts escaped: impossible to retain them, they slid down a steep slope… What was happening to me? If my reason collapsed, I might as well lose consciousness right away! The idea of immediate annihilation aroused an inexpressible—unrealizable—hope. No need to go find Snaut or Sartorius, no one could fully realize what I had experienced, what I had seen, what I had touched with my own hands. There was only one explanation, only one way out: madness. Yes, that&#39;s it, I had gone mad as soon as I arrived here. The fumes from the ocean had attacked my brain; hallucinations followed one another; I should not waste my strength trying to solve illusory riddles, but ask for help from a doctor, radio the Prometheus or some other ship, send an SOS An unexpected change took place in me: at the thought that I had gone mad, I calmed down. I had however clearly heard the words of Snaut… if Snaut existed and if I had ever spoken with him! The hallucinations could have started much earlier. Perhaps I was staying aboard the Prometheus? A mental illness had suddenly struck me down and I faced the creations of my irritated brain. Assuming I was ill, I was allowed to believe that I was going to be cured, which granted me a hope of deliverance - a hope that I had to give up, if I attributed reality to the muddled nightmares I had just experienced. to cross. Above all, it was necessary to design a logical experiment – experimentum crucis – which would reveal that I had really gone mad, that I was the victim of the mirages of my imagination, or that, despite their absurd improbability, I had experienced events real. Thinking, I looked at the rail that led to the launch pad. It was a steel beam, sprung from the wall, painted pale green and lined with curved metal plates. In a few places, a meter above the ground, the varnish was peeling, worn by the friction of the trolleys transporting the rockets. I touched the steel, I warmed it under my fingers, I hit the flattened top of the armour. Could delirium reach such a degree of reality? Yes, I answered to myself. After all, it was my field, I knew the matter. But was it possible to design a key experience? No, I tell myself at first, it&#39;s impossible, because my sick brain (if it is really sick) will create the illusions that I will demand of it. In the most banal sleep, without being sick, we converse with strangers, to whom we ask questions and whose answers we hear. Moreover, although our interlocutors are in reality the creations of our own psychic activity, forged by a pseudo-independent process, until these interlocutors speak to us, we do not know what words will escape their lips. Yet these words were formulated by a separate part of our mind; we should, therefore, know them the very moment we elaborate them to place them in the mouths of fictitious beings. Also, whatever my project of experience, and in whatever way I put it into execution, I will always be able to estimate that I behave exactly as in my dream. Snaut or Sartorius having no real existence, it would be futile to ask them any questions. I had the idea of taking a powder, some powerful drug, peyote, for example, or some other preparation causing colored hallucinations. If visions ensued, it would prove that I had truly experienced the recent events and that they related to the surrounding material reality. And then no, I thought, that wouldn&#39;t be the desirable key experience, since I knew the effects of the drug (which I would have to choose myself), and my imagination could suggest to me the double illusion of having taken this drug and experiencing its effects. I went around in circles, the circle always closed; there was no way out. You couldn&#39;t think otherwise than with your brain, you couldn&#39;t see yourself from the outside in order to check the proper functioning of your internal processes… Suddenly, a thought struck me, as simple as it is effective. I jumped to my feet and ran to the radio booth. The room was deserted. I glanced at the electric clock on the wall. Almost four o&#39;clock, the agreed fourth hour of the night inside the Station; outside, the red sun shone. I quickly plugged in the long-range transmitter and, as the lamps warmed up, I mentally reviewed the main steps of the experiment. I didn&#39;t remember the call signal to which the satelloid&#39;s automatic station responded; I found it on a piece of cardboard, hanging above the central control panel. I sent the call in Morse code and the answer came eight seconds later. The satelloid, that is to say its electronic brain, announced itself by a rhythmic signal. I commanded the satelloid to let me know which interstellar meridians of the Galaxy it passed through at twenty-two second intervals as it circled Solaris, and demanded fractions of five digits. Then I sat down and waited for the answer. She came to me after ten minutes. I tore off the strip of freshly printed paper and hid it in a drawer (being careful not to look at it). I took out of the library large maps of the sky, tables of logarithms, a calendar defining the daily route of the satellite, as well as a few auxiliary books. Then I set out to find the answer to the question I had asked. For a good hour, I lined up the equations. For a long time, since the time of my studies, I had not indulged in such calculations. When was my last performance? On the practical astronomy exam, no doubt. I carried out the operations with the help of the Station&#39;s huge calculator. My reasoning was as follows: by carrying out my calculations according to the sky charts, I will obtain an approximate cross-check of the results provided by the satelloid. Approximate, because the path of the satelloid is subject to very complicated variations, due to the action of the gravitational forces of Solaris and its two suns, also due to localized gravitational deviations caused by the ocean. When I have the two series of figures, one provided by the satelloid and the other calculated theoretically from the sky chart, I will bring corrections to my operations; then, the two groups will overlap up to the fourth decimal place; differences will remain only at the fifth, due to the unpredictable action of the ocean. If the figures obtained from the satelloid are not a reality, but the product of my wandering mind, there will be no possible cross-check with the second series, I said to myself. My brain may be sick, but it cannot, under any circumstances, compete with the Station&#39;s great calculator and secretly perform calculations that would have required several months of work. Therefore, if the numbers match, the Station&#39;s great calculator really exists, I&#39;ve actually used it, and I&#39;m not delusional. My hands were shaking as I took the telegraph tape out of the drawer and spread it out beside the wide strip of paper from the computer. The two sets of numbers matched, as I had expected, down to the fourth decimal place. The differences did not appear until the fifth. I hid all the papers in the drawer. So the calculator existed independently of me; it meant that the Station, with its inhabitants, really existed. I was about to close the drawer when I noticed that it was stuffed with sheets, covered with calculations impatiently scribbled. A single glance revealed to me that someone had already tried an experiment similar to mine and asked the satelloid, not for information concerning the interstellar meridians, but for measurements of the albedo of Solaris at intervals of forty seconds. . I was not crazy. The last ray of hope faded. I unplugged the transmitter, I drank the broth that remained at the bottom of the heat-insulated bottle and I went to bed.