The tube corridor was empty. I stood for a moment in front of the closed door, listening. The walls must have been thin; there was a whine of wind coming from outside. On the panel of the door there was a rectangular piece of plaster with a pencil inscription stuck a little obliquely, carelessly: "Man". I stared at the scribbled indistinct word. For a moment I wanted to go back to Snaut, but I realised that was impossible.
The maddening warning still sounded in my ears. I moved and my shoulders were bent by the unbearable weight of the suit. Silently, as if I were hiding involuntarily from an unseen observer, I returned to a circular room with five doors. On them were plaques: Dr Gibarian, Dr Snaut, Dr Sartorius. There were none on the fourth. I hesitated, then pressed the handle lightly and opened them slowly. As they swung open, I experienced a feeling bordering on certainty that someone was there. I stepped inside.
There was no one there. The same, only slightly smaller, convex window pointed out at the ocean, which here - under the sun - glistened greasily, as if reddened oil was flowing from the waves. The scarlet glare filled the entire room, similar to a ship's cabin. On one side stood shelves with books, between them, clipped vertically to the wall, a bed fixed on gimbals, on the other side was full of cupboards, hanging between them on nickel-plated frames were striped aerial photographs, in metal holders were flasks and test-tubes crammed with cotton wool, under the window white enamelled boxes were arranged in two rows so that one could barely pass between them. The lids of some were tilted - they were filled with a lot of tools, plastic hoses, in both corners there were taps, a fume hood, behind-freezers, the microscope stood on the floor, there was no more room for it on the big table next to the window. When I turned around, just by the entrance door I saw a ceiling-length, unclosed wardrobe full of overalls, work and protective aprons, underwear on the shelves, aluminium bottles for portable oxygen apparatuses glittered between the uppers of over-heated shoes. Two devices and their masks dangled, hooked to the railing of a raised bed. Everywhere there was the same roughly ordered chaos, as if in a hurry. I drew in the air investigatively, sensed a faint scent of chemical reagents and a trace of a pungent odour - could it be chlorine? Instinctively, I searched with my eyes for the grilled ventilation outlets in the ceiling corners. Strips of paper stuck to their frames fanned gently as a sign that the compressors were working, maintaining normal air circulation. I moved the books, apparatus and tools from the two chairs into the corners, pushed them together as best I could until there was a relatively empty space around the bed between the cupboard and the shelves. I pulled the stand to hang the jumpsuit on it, took the zip handles in my fingers, but immediately let them go. Somehow I couldn't bring myself to drop the suit, as if that would make me vulnerable. Once more I took in the whole room with my eyes, checked that the door was properly latched, and since there was no lock on it, after a brief hesitation I pushed the two heaviest boxes towards it. Having barricaded myself in this makeshift manner, with three jerks I extricated myself from my heavy, creaking shell. A narrow mirror on the inner surface of the wardrobe reflected part of the room. Out of the corner of my eye I caught some movement there, I jerked up, but it was my own reflection. The leotard under the jumpsuit was sweaty. I threw it off and pushed open the wardrobe. It moved away, in the alcove behind it the walls of a miniature bathroom glowed. On the floor beneath the ink rested a large, flat cassette. I carried it not without difficulty into the room. As I set it on the floor, the lid sprang open as if on a spring and I saw compartments filled with bizarre artefacts: full of tools roughly caricatured or sketched in dark metal, partly analogous to those that lay in the cupboards. They were all unusable, undeformed, rounded, over-melted, as if brought out of a fire. Strangest of all, the same shape of destruction even wore the ceramite, so practically non-melting handles. In no laboratory furnace would it be possible to reach their flaming temperatures - except inside an atomic stack. I retrieved a small ray indicator from the pocket of my dishevelled jumpsuit, but the black muzzle was silent as I approached the remains.
I was wearing only briefs and a mesh T-shirt. I threw both on the floor like rags and jumped naked under the ink. The impact of the water felt like a relief. I wriggled under the downpour of hard, hot streams, massaging my body, scabbing, all of it somehow exaggerated, as if I were shaking it off, expelling all the murky, suspicion-infested insecurity that filled the Station. I searched in the wardrobe for a lightweight workout outfit that could also be worn under a jumpsuit, put all my scanty possessions in my pocket; between the pages of my notebook I felt something hard, it was an unaccountably misplaced key from my earthly abode, which I turned for a while in my fingers, not knowing what to do with it. Finally, I placed it on the table. It occurred to me that, perhaps, I might need a weapon of some kind. It certainly wasn't an all-purpose pocket knife, but I didn't have anything else, and I wasn't yet in such a state of mind as to start looking for some kind of ray-thrower or something. I sat down on a metal chair in the middle of an empty space, away from all things. I wanted to be alone. I was pleased to find that I still had more than half an hour of time; it's hard, it's my nature to be meticulous in observing any and all, important or unimportant, commitments. The hands on the twenty-four hour clock face stood at seven o'clock. The sun was setting. Seven o'clock local time was Prometheus' twenty decks. Solaris must have already dwindled to the size of a spark on Moddard's screens and was indistinguishable from the stars. But what could I care about Prometheus? I closed my eyes. There was complete silence, if one did not count the meowing of the pipes that sounded at regular intervals. The water cycled quietly in the bathroom, dripping onto the porcelain.
Gibarian was dead. If I understood what Snaut was saying correctly, it was barely a dozen hours since his death. What did they do with the body? Did they bury it? True, on this planet that could not be done. I pondered this matter-of-factly for a long moment, as if the fate of the dead was paramount, until, having realised the nonsensical nature of these musings, I stood up and began to walk diagonally across the room, nudging with the end of my foot a disorderly scattering of books, some small, empty field bag; I bent down and picked it up. It was not empty. It contained a flask of dark glass, as light as if it had been blown out of paper. I looked through it to the window, into the bleakly reddening, smoky dirty mists of the last light of the west. What was happening to me?
Why was I preoccupied with any nonsense, any unimportant trifle that fell into my hand?
I twitched as the light came on. A photocell, of course, sensitive to the falling dusk. I was filled with anticipation, the tension building up to the point where I didn't want an empty space behind me. I decided to fight it. I moved my chair over to the shelves.
I pulled out the all-too-familiar second volume of Hughe-s and Eugel-s old monograph 'The History of Solaris' and began to leaf through it, having supported the thick, stiff spine on my knee.
The discovery of Solaris took place almost a century before I was born. The planet orbits two suns - a red one and a blue one. For forty years, no ship came close to it. In those days, the Ga-mov-Shapley theory of the impossibility of life on the planets of double stars was taken for granted. The orbits of such planets are constantly changing due to the gravitational play occurring when a pair of suns orbit each other. The resulting perturbations alternately shrink and stretch the planet's orbit and the beginnings of life, if they arise, are destroyed by radiant heat or icy cold. These changes take place over a period of millions of years, so - according to the astronomical or biological scale (because evolution requires hundreds of millions, if not billions of years) - in a very short time.
According to the original calculations, Solaris was to approach its red sun in five hundred thousand years at a distance of half an astronomical unit, and after a further million years to fall into its glowing abyss.
But after only a dozen years or so, it was found that its track did not show the expected changes at all, quite as if it were constant, as constant as the tracks of the planets in our solar system.
Observations and calculations were repeated, now with the utmost accuracy, which only confirmed what was known: that Solaris has an unsteady orbit.
From one of the several hundred planets discovered each year, which, with a few lines of notes giving the elements of their motion, are drawn into the great statistics, Solaris was then promoted to the rank of a body worthy of special attention.
Thus, four years after this discovery, it was circumnavigated by the Ottenskjold expedition, which explored the planet with Laokoon and two accompanying support ships. This expedition had the character of a makeshift, improvised reconnaissance, especially as it was incapable of landing.
It put more automatic observer satellites into equatorial and polar orbits, whose main task was to measure gravitational potentials. In addition, it surveyed the planet's surface, almost entirely covered by ocean, and the few plateaus that rise above its level. Their combined surface area does not match that of Europa, although Solaris is twenty per cent larger in diameter than Earth. These patches of rocky and desert land, scattered irregularly, are mainly concentrated in the southern hemisphere. The composition of the atmosphere, which is devoid of oxygen, was also learned, and the planet's density, as well as its albedo and other astronomical elements, were measured with excessive accuracy. As expected, no traces of life were found either on the landmasses or spotted in the ocean.
Over the next ten years, Solaris, now at the centre of attention of all observatories in the region, showed an astonishing tendency to maintain its beyond all doubt gravitationally unstable orbit. For some time, the matter smelled of scandal, as attempts were made to blame (for the sake of science) either certain people or the calculating machines they used for such an observational result.
Lack of funds delayed the sending of a proper solar expedition for a further three years, until Shannahan, having completed the crew, obtained three C-class spacecraft from the Institute. A year and a half before the arrival of the expedition, which launched from the Aquarius alpha area, a second exploration fleet launched an automated Sateloid, Luna 247, into a circumbinary orbit on behalf of the Institute. This Sateloid, after three successive reconstructions separated by decades, is still in operation today. The data it collected conclusively confirmed the Ottenskjold expedition's observation of the active nature of the ocean's movements.
One Shannahan ship remained in high orbit, while two, after initial preparations, landed on a rocky patch of land that covers about six hundred square miles off the south pole of Solaris. The expedition's work was completed after eighteen months, proceeding successfully except for one unfortunate accident caused by malfunctioning instruments. However, the scientific team split into two opposing camps. The subject of the dispute became the ocean. On the basis of analyses, it was regarded as an organic entity (no one dared to call it alive at that time). Biologists, however, saw it as a primitive formation - a kind of gigantic anastomosis, as it were, a single liquid cell (but they called it a "prebiological formation"), which surrounded the entire globe with a gelatinous mantle, with a depth of several miles in places - astronomers and physicists argued that it must be an extraordinarily highly organised structure, perhaps beating the complexity of terrestrial organisms, if it could actively influence the formation of the planetary orbit. No other cause explaining the behaviour of Solaris was detected, and moreover, planetophysicists detected a link between certain processes of the plasmatic ocean and the locally measured gravitational potential, which varied according to the oceanic 'metabolism'.
Thus physicists, not biologists, put forward the paradoxical phrase 'plasmatic machine' understanding it to mean a creature, in our sense perhaps not animate, but capable of taking purposeful action on an - let us add at once - astronomical scale.
In this dispute, which like a whirlpool drew in all the most eminent authorities within weeks, the Gamow-Shapley doctrine was shaken for the first time in eighty years.
Some time later, it was still attempted to defend it with the claim that the ocean had nothing to do with life, that it was not even a 'para-' or 'prebiological' creation, but a geological formation, probably unusual, but only capable of fixing the orbit of Solaris through changes in gravity; Le Chatelier's rule was invoked.
In spite of this conservatism, hypotheses grew up, proclaiming, such as one of the better elaborated by Civita-Vitty, that the ocean is the result of a dialectical development: behold, from its primordial form, from a praoceane, a solution of lazily reacting chemical bodies, it managed, under the pressure of conditions (that is, the orbital changes threatening its existence), without the mediation of all terrestrial levels of development, so bypassing the emergence of unicellular and multicellular organisms, plant and animal evolution, without the birth of a nervous system, of a brain, to leap immediately into the stage of a "homeostatic ocean". In other words, it did not adapt itself like terrestrial organisms over hundreds of millions of years to its environment, only to give rise to a rational race after such an enormous period of time, but it mastered its environment at once.
This was not at all original, only that no one still knew how a syrupy jelly could stabilise the orbit of a celestial body. For almost a century, devices creating artificial force and gravitational fields - gravitators - had been known, but no one had even imagined how an amorphous ooze, the result - in gravitators - of complicated nuclear reactions and enormous temperatures, could be perfected. Newspapers, which at that time, to the curiosity of readers and to the horror of scientists, were full of the most unsophisticated inventions on the subject of the "mystery of Solaris", did not lack such claims that the planetary ocean is... a distant relative of Earth's electric eels.
When the problem was, to some extent at least, solved, it turned out that the explanation, as was sometimes the case with Solaris afterwards, replaced one mystery with another, perhaps even more astonishing.
The research showed that the ocean is by no means acting on the principle of our gravitators (which would be impossible anyway), but is able to directly model the metrics of space-time, leading, among other things, to deviations in the measurement of time on one and the same Solaris meridian. Thus, the ocean not only knew in a sense, but was even able (which cannot be said of us) to exploit the consequences of Einstein-Boevi theory.
When this was said, one of the most violent storms of our century erupted in the scientific world. The most venerable theories, universally accepted as true, collapsed into rubble, the most heretical articles appeared in the scientific literature, and the alternative of 'brilliant ocean' or 'gravitational jelly' fired up all minds.
All this was happening a good dozen years before I was born. By the time I went to school, Solaris - thanks to facts learned later - was already widely recognised as a planet endowed with life - only with a single inhabitant....
The second volume by Hughes and Eugel, which I was still leafing through almost mindlessly, began with a systematisation, as original as it was amusing. The classification table presented in turn: Type - Polytheria, Order - Syncytialia, Class - Metamorpha.
It was as if we knew God knows how many specimens of the species, when in reality there was still only one, admittedly weighing seventeen trillion tonnes.
Colourful diagrams, colourful graphs, analyses and spectral spectra flitted under my fingers, demonstrating the type and rate of basic transformation and its chemical reactions. The further I delved into the bulky volume, the more mathematics flashed across the chalky pages; one would -think- that our knowledge of this representative of the Metamorph class, who lay, shrouded in the darkness of a four-hour night, a few hundred metres below the steel floor of the Station, was complete. In fact, not everyone was yet in agreement as to whether it was a 'creature', let alone whether the ocean could be called rational. I put the large volume on the shelf with a clatter and brought out another. It was divided into two parts. The first was devoted to a summary of the experimental protocols of all those myriad ventures to make contact with the ocean. This making of contact had been, I remembered all too well, a source of endless anecdotes, mockery and jokes during my studies; the medieval scholasticism seemed a lucid, glowingly obvious lecture in the face of the jungle that the issue had spawned. The second part of the volume, almost one thousand three hundred pages long, was occupied by the subject bibliography alone. The original literature would certainly not have fit in the room where I was sitting.
The first attempts at contact were made via special electronic apparatuses, transforming the stimuli, sent in both directions. The ocean took an active part in shaping these apparatuses. But all this took place in complete darkness. What did he mean by "taking part?" It was modifying certain elements of the submerged devices, with the result that the recorded rhythms of the discharges were changing, the recording apparatuses were capturing a myriad of signals, as if snippets of some giant action of higher analysis, but what did it all mean? Perhaps they were data on the ocean's momentary state of agitation? Perhaps impulses, causing its giant creations, somewhere, thousands of miles away from the researchers? Perhaps translated into undated electron constructs - reflections of the eternal truths of this ocean? Perhaps his works of art? Who could know, since it was impossible to get the same response to a stimulus twice? If once the response was an explosion of impulses, almost bursting the apparatuses, and once a deafening silence? Since no experiment could be repeated? It still seemed that we were just a step away from deciphering this ever-growing sea of records; after all, electronic brains with a processing power of information that no problem had ever required had been built specifically for this purpose. Indeed, some results have been obtained. The ocean - a source of electric, magnetic, gravitational impulses - spoke as if in the language of mathematics; certain sequences of its current discharges could be classified, using the most abstract branches of terrestrial
analysis, the theory of multiplicity, there appeared homologues of structures known from that branch of physics which deals with the consideration of the mutual relation of energy and matter, finite and infinite quantities, particles and fields - all this led the scientists to believe that they had a thinking monster before them, that it was a kind of millionfold expanding, girdling the whole planet, a protoplasmic mo-machine-brain, which is wasting its time with incredible in its breadth theoretical reflections on the essence of all things, and all that our apparatus catches are small, accidentally overheard fragments of this gigantic monologue going on eternally in the depths, surpassing all our understanding. So much for mathematicians. Such hypotheses have been described by some as an expression of disregard for human capabilities, as falling on one's face before something we do not yet understand, but which can be understood, as bringing the old doctrine of "ignoramus et ignorabi-nius" out of the grave; others again considered them to be harmful and idle nonsense, that in these hypotheses of mathematicians, the mythology of our times manifests itself, seeing in the giant brain - whether electron or plasmatic, it is all the same - the supreme goal of existence - the sum of being.
And others still ... but the researchers and views were legion. What, after all, was the whole field of trying to 'make contact' compared to other branches of solar science, in which specialisation had progressed so far, especially over the last quarter of a century, that it was almost impossible for a so-larist-cyberneticist to communicate with a solar scientist-symbolist. "How can you communicate with the ocean if you can no longer do so among yourselves?" - once jokingly asked Veubeke, who was then, during my studies, the director of the Institute; there was much truth in this joke. For it was also no accident that the ocean was classified in the Metamorph class. Its undulating surface could give rise to the most disparate, earth-like forms, while the purpose - adaptive, cognitive or whatever - of these sometimes violent eruptions of plasmatic 'creativity' was a complete mystery. Putting the volume, so heavy that I had to hold it with both hands, on the shelf, I thought that our knowledge of Solaris, filling the libraries, is useless ballast and a quagmire of facts, and we are in the same place where it started to accumulate, seventy-eight years ago, and actually the situation was much worse, because all the effort of those years turned out to be in vain.
What we knew exactly included mere denials. The ocean did not use or build machines, although in certain circumstances it seemed capable of doing so, since it duplicated parts of some of the apparatuses immersed in it, but it did so only during the first and second years of exploration work; after that, it ignored all repeated attempts with Benedictine patience, as if it had lost for our devices and products (and it would appear that for us too...) all interest. He did not have - I continue enumerating our "negative news" - no nervous system or cells, no protein-like structure; it did not always respond to stimuli, even the most powerful ones (so, for example, it completely "ignored" the crash of the auxiliary rocket ship of the second Giese expedition, which plummeted from a height of three hundred kilometres onto the planet's surface, destroying a mile-and-a-half radius of plasma with the explosion of its atomic stacks).
Slowly, in scientific circles, the 'Solaris affair' began to sound like a 'lost cause', especially in the scientific spheres of the Institute's administration, where voices were raised in recent years demanding that grants for further research be cut. So far, no one has dared to talk about closing down the Station altogether; it would be too open an admission of defeat. In fact, some people, in private conversations
' in private conversations, said that all we needed was a strategy of withdrawing from the 'Solaris affair' as 'honourably' as possible.
For many, however, and especially for the young, this "affair" was slowly becoming something of a touchstone of self-esteem: "in essence," they said, "there is more at stake than the exploration of Solaris civilisation, for the game is about ourselves, about the limits of human cognition".
For some time there was a popular view (fervently disseminated by the daily press) that the thinking ocean, which surrounds the whole of Solaris, is a gigantic brain, surpassing our civilisation by millions of years of development, that it is some kind of "cosmic yoga", a sage, an embodied omniscience, which has long since understood the futility of all action and therefore maintains a categorical silence towards us. This was simply untrue, for the living ocean acts, and acts as it still does, only according to non-human concepts, so it does not build cities, nor bridges, nor flying machines; nor does it try to conquer space or transcend it (in which some defenders of human superiority saw an invaluable asset for us at all costs), but deals with a thousand transformations - "ontological self-morphosis" - and there is no shortage of scientific terms in solaristic works! Since, on the other hand, a person who persistently reads into all possible solarist works is overwhelmed by the irresistible impression that he has before him fractions of intellectual constructions, perhaps brilliant, mixed without order or composition with the products of some complete, bordering on insanity, stupidity, the idea of "ocean-yoga" arose as the antithesis of the concept of "ocean-debil".
These hypotheses brought out of the grave and revived one of the oldest philosophical problems - the relation of matter and spirit, of consciousness. It took considerable courage to attribute consciousness to the ocean for the first time - as du Haart did. This problem, hastily declared metaphysical by methodologists, smouldered at the bottom of almost all discussions and disputes. Is it possible to think without consciousness? But can the processes taking place in the ocean be called thinking? Is a mountain a very large stone? Is a planet a huge mountain? These names can be used, but the new scale of size brings new regularities and new phenomena to the stage. This problem has become the square circle of our time. Every independent thinker has tried to contribute to the treasury of solaristics; theories have proliferated proclaiming that we have before us the product of a degeneration, a backsliding that has followed the ocean's bygone phase of 'intellectual splendour', already that the ocean is in fact a tumour-glial, which, having been born within the bodies of the planet's former inhabitants, has devoured them all and absorbed them, melting the remains into the form of an eternal, self-rejuvenating, supracellular element. 
In the white, Earth-like light of the fluorescent lamps, I removed the cameras l books that lay on the table and, spreading out a map of Solaris on a plastic board, I gazed into it, leaning with my hands against the metal slats at the edges, the living ocean had its shallows and depths, and its islands, covered with a tarnish of weathering minerals, testified that they had once formed its bottom - did it also regulate the emergence and sinking of the rock formations submerged in its bosom? It was completely dark. I stared at the huge hemispheres on the map, painted in various tones of purple and blue, experiencing, I don't know for which time in my life, an astonishment as shocking as the first one, experienced when, as a boy, I learned at school about the existence of Solaris.
I don't know how it happened that the surroundings, together with the mystery of Gib-rian's death, that even my unknowable future seemed to me at once unimportant, and I thought of nothing, submerged in looking at this map, terrifying to every human being.
The different stretches of the vivarium were named after the explorers who had devoted themselves to their exploration. I was staring at the equatorial archipelagoes of the Thexalla gliomasiv when I felt someone's gaze on me.
I was still standing over the map, but I could no longer see it; I was as if paralysed. The door was in front of me; it was jammed with crates and a cupboard squatting against it. 'It's some kind of automaton,' I thought, although none had been in the room before, and it couldn't have entered without me noticing. The skin on the nape of my neck and back was beginning to burn, the feeling of a heavy, immobile gaze was becoming unbearable. I didn't realise that by pulling my head into my arms I was leaning harder and harder against the table, which began to glide slowly across the floor; this movement as if it had liberated me. I turned around abruptly.
The room was empty. In front of me, only the great semicircular window wafted black. The sensation did not subside. Darkness stared back at me, amorphous, huge, eyeless, boundless. No star illuminated the darkness beyond the panes. I pulled back the light-proof curtains. I hadn't even been on the Station for an hour, and I was already beginning to understand why there were incidents of persecutory mania on it. I linked it reflexively to the death of Gib-rian. Knowing him, I had hitherto thought that nothing could have disturbed his mind. I stopped being sure of that. I stood in the middle of the room next to the table. My breathing had calmed down, I could feel the sweat that had occurred on my forehead cooling down. What had I thought of just now? The truth - about the vending machines. The fact that I hadn't encountered any in the corridor or in the rooms was very strange. Where had they all gone? The only one I encountered - remotely - belonged to a mechanical airport attendant. And the others?
I glanced at my watch. Actually, I should have gone to Snaut by now.
I went out. The corridor was lit rather dimly by fluorescent lights running from the ceiling. I passed two doors until I came to the one with Gibarian's name on it. I stood in front of them for a long time. Silence filled the station. I took the handle. I didn't actually want to go in there at all. It bent, the door moved an inch away, a gap appeared, black for a moment, then the light came on. Now anyone passing along the corridor could see me. I crossed the threshold quickly and closed the door behind me, noiselessly and firmly. Then I turned around.
I stood with my back almost touching the door. It was a larger room than mine, also with a panoramic window, three-quarters covered by a curtain of tiny blue and pink flowers, undoubtedly brought from Earth and not part of the Station's equipment. Along the walls were library shelves and cabinets, both enamelled a very light green with a silvery sheen. Their contents, dumped in whole piles on the floor, piled up between stools and armchairs. Just in front of me, two step stools blocked the aisle, toppled and wedged partially into the piles of magazines that jutted from cracked folders. The open, page-fanning books were drenched with liquids from broken flasks and flasks with lapped corks, most of them so thick-walled that a mere fall to the floor, even from a considerable height, would have failed to shatter them. Beneath the window lay an overturned desk with a broken work lamp on a cantilevered arm; a stool lay in front of it, its two legs caved in. half-extended drawers. A veritable flood of cards, handwritten sheets, papers covered the entire floor. I recognised Gibarian's handwriting and leaned over them. Picking up the loose sheets, I noticed that my hand was casting not a single shadow as before, but a double shadow.
I turned around. The pink curtain blazed as if lit at the top, a sharp line of violent blue fire that expanded with each passing moment. I jerked the fabric to the side - my eyes were gobsmacked by the shrill fire. It occupied a third of the horizon. A thicket of long, ghastly stretched shadows ran in dimpled waves towards the Station. It was the east. In the zone where the Station was located, the planet's second blue sun was ascending into the sky after an hour-long night. An automatic switch turned off the ceiling lights as I returned to the abandoned papers. I came across a succinct description of an experiment designed three weeks ago - Gibarian intended to subject plasma to very hard X-rays. I realised from the text that it was intended for Sartorius, who was to organise the experiment - I held a copy in my hand. The white sheets of paper were beginning to glaring at me. The day that followed was different from the previous one. Under the orange sky of the cooling sun, the ocean, inked with bloody reflections, was covered almost always with a dirty-pink haze, melting into one the vault, the clouds, the waves - it was all gone now. Even the light filtering through the pink fabric burned like the torch of a powerful quartz lamp. The tan of my hands became almost grey in it. The whole room changed, everything that had a tinge of red turned brown and faded to the colour of liver, while white, green and yellow objects sharpened in colour that they seemed to radiate their own glow. Squinting, I looked through the crack of the curtain: the sky was a white sea of fire, beneath which vibrated and dangled as if liquid metal. I clenched my eyelids with red circles expanding in my field of vision. On the console of the washbasin (its rim was shattered) I discovered dark glasses, covering almost half my face, and put them on. The window curtain was now blazing like a sodium flame. I read on, picking up the sheets from the ground and placing them on the only table not overturned. Parts of the text were missing. Protocols of experiments already carried out were going. I learned from them that they had subjected the ocean to irradiation for four days at a point one thousand four hundred miles north-east of its present location. All of this together surprised me because the use of X-rays was forbidden by UN convention because of their lethal effects, and I was quite sure that no one had approached Earth to get permission for these experiments. At one point, raising my head, I saw my own reflection in the mirror of the ajar wardrobe door, a deathly white face with black glasses. Incredibly the room looked, blazing white and blue, but after a few minutes a protracted rasping sound could be heard and airtight flaps slid shut on the windows from outside; the interior darkened and the artificial light came on, strangely pale now. It only got warmer and warmer until the steady tone emanating from the air-conditioning ducts resembled a strained whine. The Station's cooling apparatuses were working at full power.
Nevertheless, the dead heat was still rising.
Footsteps reached me. Someone was walking down the corridor. With two noiseless steps I found myself at the door. The steps slowed down and died away. Whoever was walking was standing behind the door. The handle bent slowly; without thinking, I reflexively grabbed it from my side and held it. The pressure did not intensify, but neither did it weaken. The person on the other side of the door acted just as silently, as if surprised. We held the handle for a good moment. Then it sprang suddenly in my hand - it let go, and a faint rustling noise indicated that the other person was leaving. I stood still listening, but there was silence.
