Kris, is it because of the experiment?
I shrank back at the sound of her voice. I had been lying sleepless for hours, staring into the darkness, alone because I couldn't even hear her breathing, and in the convoluted labyrinths of nighttime thoughts, mayhem, half sense and taking on a new dimension and meaning because of it, I had forgotten about her.
- What... How do you know I'm awake...? - I asked. There was fear in my voice.
- By the way you breathe... - she said quietly, somehow apologetically. - I didn't want to disturb you... If you can't, don't say...
- No, why. Yes, it's that experiment. You guessed it.
- What do they expect from it?
- They don't know themselves. Something. Anything. It's not Operation Think, it's Operation Despair. Now all it takes is one man to be brave enough and take responsibility for the decision, but this kind of bravery is considered by most to be mere cowardice, because it is retreat, you think, resignation, escape unworthy of a man. As if it were worthy of a man to wade in and get bogged down and drown in something he does not comprehend and never will.
I shrugged, but before my accelerated breathing could calm down, a new surge of anger shot out of my mouth: - Naturally, there is never a shortage of guys with a practical outlook. They said that even if we didn't make contact, by studying this plasma - all these crazy living cities that pop up 24 hours a day to disappear - we'd learn the secrets of matter, as if they didn't know it was fooling ourselves, walking through a library, written in an incomprehensible language, that we'd only be looking at the colours of the ridges.... And how!
- Aren't there more planets like this?
- We do not know. Maybe there are, we only know this one. In any case, it is something extremely rare, not like the Earth. We, we are common, we are the grass of the universe, and we pride ourselves on this commonness of ours, that it is so common, and we thought everything could be accommodated in it. It was the kind of scheme with which we set off boldly and joyfully into the distance: other worlds! Well, so what are these other worlds? Master them or be mastered, there was nothing else in these hapless brains, ah, not worth it. Not worth it.
I got up, searched the medicine cabinet in the dark for a flat jar of sleeping pills.
- 'I'm going to sleep, darling,' I said, turning towards the darkness where a fan hummed high up. - I need to sleep. Otherwise I don't know myself...
I sat up on the bed. She touched my hand. I grasped it, unseen, and held it motionless until the strength of this embrace was loosened by sleep.
In the morning, when I woke up fresh and rested, the experiment seemed to me something trivial; I did not understand how I could attach such importance to it. Also, the fact that Harey had to come with me to the laboratory mattered little to me. All her efforts became futile after my absence from the room for a few minutes, so I gave up on further attempts, which she insisted on (she was even ready to be locked up somewhere), and advised her to get herself a book to read.
More than the procedure itself, I was more interested in what I would find in the lab. Apart from the rather significant gaps in the bookcases and analytical glass cabinets (moreover, some cabinets were missing glass, and the panel of one door was star-cracked, as if a battle had been fought here recently, with the marks hastily but meticulously removed), there was nothing peculiar in this large, blue-and-white room. Snaut, fiddling with the apparatus, behaved supremely correctly, accepted Harey's appearance as something quite ordinary and bowed slightly to her from a distance; while he was wetting my temples and forehead with physiological fluid, Sartorius appeared. He entered through a small door leading into a dark room. He was in a white coat, with a black anti-radiation apron imposed over it, which reached his ankles. Spontaneous, sweeping, he greeted me as if we were one of the hundreds of employees of a great earthly institute and had parted the previous day. I noticed only now that the dead expression was given to his face by the contact lenses he wore under his eyelids instead of his glasses.
With his arms crossed over his chest, he stood . watching as Snaut bandaged the electrodes applied to my head with a bandage that formed a kind of white cap. He circled the entire room with his eyes several times, as if not not noticing Harey at all, who, hunched over, unhappy, was sitting on a small stool against the wall pretending to read a book; when Snaut stepped away from my chair, I moved my head, laden with metal and wires, to see him switch on the apparatus, but Sartorius raised his hand unexpectedly and spoke with an anointed expression:
- Dr Kelvin! Please pay attention and concentrate for a moment! I do not intend to impose anything on you, for that would not lead to the goal, but you must stop thinking of yourself, of me, of your colleague Snaut, of any other individuals, so that, eliminating the randomness of individuality, you can focus on the cause we represent here. The Earth and Solaris, generations of researchers constituting a whole, even though individual people have their beginning and end, our tenacity in the pursuit of intellectual contact, the magnitude of the historical path traversed by humanity, the certainty of its extension in future time, the readiness to make all sacrifices and toil, to give all personal feelings to this mission of ours - this is the series of themes that should fill your consciousness most thoroughly. Although the course of associations does not depend entirely on your will, the fact that you are here ensures the authenticity of the sequence I have presented. If you are not sure that you have fulfilled the task, please say so and my colleague Snaut will repeat the transcript. After all, we have time...
He said the last words with a pale, dry smile that did not take away the expression of penetrating stupor in his eyes. I was squirming inwardly from the steak of these platitudes uttered so seriously, with such solemnity, fortunately Snaut broke the protracted silence.
- May I, Kris? - he asked, leaning with his elbow against the high panel of the electroencephalograph, in a careless and confidential pose at the same time, as if he were leaning against a chair. I was grateful to him for calling me by my first name.
- You can," I said, closing my eyes. The trepidation that had deserted my mind when he had finished attaching the electrodes and put his fingers on the switch had suddenly subsided; through my eyelashes I saw the pinkish glow of the control lights on the black plate of the camera. At the same time
the damp and unpleasant chill of the metal electrodes, like cold coins girdling my head, faded. I was like a grey, unlit arena. This emptiness was assisted on all sides by a crowd of unseen spectators, amphitheatrically summoned around a silence in which ironic contempt for Sartorius and the Mission unraveled. The tension of the internal observers, desirous of playing an improvised role, was waning. Harey? - I thought the word rehearsed, with nauseating anxiety, ready to withdraw it immediately. But this alert, blind audience of mine did not protest. For some moment I was all pure tenderness, sincere grief, ready for patient, long sacrifices. Harey filled me without features, without shape, without face, and at once, through her impersonal, desperately tenderness-breathing notion with all the solemnity of her professorial countenance, Giese, the father of solaristics and solarists, swung to me in the grey darkness. But it was not the muddy outburst that I was thinking of, the stinking abyss that engulfed his golden spectacles and conscientiously brushed grey moustache, I saw only the copperplate on the title page of the monograph, the densely chalked background with which the artist had draped his head, that it stood unsuspecting almost in a halo, so similar not in features but in reliable, old-fashioned consideration to my father's face, and in the end I did not know which of them was looking at me. They both had no grave, a thing so common and ordinary in our time as to evoke no particular emotion.
The image had already disappeared, and for one moment, I don't know how long, I forgot about the Station, about the experiment, about Harey, about the black ocean, about everything, filled with a momentary like a flash of certainty that these two, no longer existing, infinitesimally small, into dried mud turned men, had lived up to everything that had befallen them, and the peace that flowed from this discovery was nullified by the formless crowd that surrounded the grey arena in silent expectation of my defeat. Together with the double clack of the apparatus being switched off, artificial light entered my eyes. I squinted my eyelids. Sarto-rius was staring at me investigatively, still in the same pose, Snaut, his back turned to him, was fiddling with the apparatus, deliberately as if crawling with trebles falling from his feet. - 'Do you think, Dr Kelvin, that you have succeeded? - suspended his nasal, repulsive voice Sartorius.
- 'Yes,' I said.
- Are you sure of that? - With a tinge of surprise or even suspicion chuckled Sartorius.
- Yes.
The certainty and the rough tone of my answer took him out of his rigid seriousness for a moment.
- That's ... Good," he mumbled and looked around as if he didn't know what to do now. Snaut walked over to the chair and started unwinding the bandages.
I got up and walked around the room, and meanwhile Sartorius, who had disappeared into the darkroom, returned with the already developed and dried film. There were trembling, whitishly serrated lines stretching across several metres of tape, like some sort of mould or cobweb, unraveling along the black, slippery ribbon of celluloid.
I had nothing left to do, but I didn't leave. The two of them fed a film into the oxidised head of the modulator, the end of which Sartorius watched once more, distrustfully steeped, as if trying to decipher the content contained in those fluttering lines.
The rest of the experiment was already invisible. I only knew what was happening when they stood at the switchboards against the wall and activated the actual apparatus. The current awoke with a faint bass thud in the coil bank under the armoured floor, and then only the lights on the vertical glazed indicator tubes went down, indicating that the great tube of the X-ray gun was lowering down the vertical shaft to rest in its open outlet. The lights then came to a standstill on the lowest bands of the scale and Snaut began to increase the voltage until the pointers, or rather the white bars that replaced them, made a fanning half turn to the right. The sound of the electricity was barely audible, nothing was happening, the drums WITH the film rotated under the cover so that even that could not be seen, the meter ticked quietly like a clockwork mechanism.
Harey looked up from her book, then at me, then at them. I approached her. She looked at me questioningly.
The experiment was already coming to an end, Sartorius walked slowly towards the big, conical camera head. - Shall we go...? - with her mouth alone, Harey asked. I nodded my head. She stood up. Without saying goodbye to anyone - it would have looked too pointless to me - I walked past Sartorius.
The tall windows of the upper corridor were filled with a sunset of exceptional beauty. It was not the usual bleak, swollen red, but all shades of misty luminous pink, as if sprinkled with the tiniest silver. The heavy, inert wavering blackness of the infinite ocean plain seemed, responding to this soft glow, to flicker with a brownish-violet, soft glare. Only at the very zenith was the sky still fiercely red.
I stopped at once in the middle of the lower corridor. I couldn't think straight about the fact that we'd be locked in a cabin again, like a prison cell, open to the ocean.
- Harey - I said - you know... I would have a look in the library... You don't mind...? - Oh, I'd love to, I'll look for something to read - she replied with a bit of artificial liveliness.
I felt that there was some unbridgeable rift between us since yesterday and that I should show her at least some cordiality, but complete apathy took over me. I don't know what would have to happen for me to snap out of it. We walked back along the corridor, then down the ramp we came to a small antechamber; there were three doors here, with flowers between them as if in some sort of display case behind crystal glass.
The middle door, leading into the library, was covered on both sides with a protuberant artificial skin; when opening it, I always tried not to touch it. Inside, in the circular great hall, under a pale silver ceiling with stylised suns, it was slightly cooler.
I ran my hand along the spines of a set of solarian classics and was already about to take out the first volume of Giese, with that copper-plate likeness on the tissue-covered preliminary sheet, when I unexpectedly discovered, unnoticed the previous time, a crackly, octavo volume of Gravinsky.
I sat down on a cushioned chair. It was completely quiet. A step behind me, Harey was leafing through a book of some sort; I could hear the light skimming of the pages under her fingers. Gravinsky's compendium, used most often in studies as a mere 'bric-a-brac', was a collection of alphabetically ordered solarian hypotheses, from Abiological to Degenerative. The compiler, who had probably never even seen Solaris, dug through all the monographs, expedition protocols, excerpt papers and provisional reports, explored even citations in the works of plane-tologists studying other globes, and produced a catalogue, a little frightening in the conciseness of its formulations, as they sometimes passed into triviality, having lost the subtle intricacy of the thoughts that patronised their birth; moreover, the whole thing, intended as an encyclopaedic work, already presented a rather curio value; The volume was published twenty years ago, and in the meantime, a mountain of new hypotheses had accumulated that could no longer be accommodated in a single book. I looked through the alphabetical list of authors as if it were a list of the fallen, hardly any of whom were still alive, probably none of whom were actively working in solar science. All this wealth of thought, scattered in all directions, gave the impression that one of the hypotheses simply had to be right, that it was impossible for reality to be quite different, different still from the myriads of proposals hurled at it. Gravinsky prefaced the thing with a preface, in which he divided the known before him sixty-less years of so-laristics into periods. In the first one - dating from the initial examination of Solaris - no one was actually making hypotheses in a conscious manner. It was assumed then, somehow intuitively, through "common sense", that the ocean was a dead, chemical conglomerate, a monstrous lump of jelly floating around the globe, bearing fruit in bizarre creations thanks to its "quasi-volcanic" activity and the spontaneous automaticity of its processes stabilising its perishable orbit, just as a pendulum maintains an unchanging plane of motion once set. Admittedly, as early as three years later, Ma-genon pronounced himself in favour of the animated nature of the "gelatinous machine", but Gravinsky did not date the period of biological hypotheses until nine years later, when Magenon's previously isolated judgement began to gain more and more supporters. The following years were full of very intricate detailed theoretical models of the living ocean, supported by biomathematical analysis. The third was a period of disintegration of the hitherto almost monolithic opinion of scientists.
It saw the emergence of a multiplicity of sometimes fiercely opposed schools of thought. This was the time of the activities of Panmaller, Strobli, Freyhouss, le Greuille, Osipovich, the whole Gie-sego legacy was then subjected to crushing criticism. It was then that the first atlases, catalogues, stereo-photographs of asymmetries, hitherto considered impossible to study, were produced; the breakthrough came with new remote-controlled devices that were sent into the turbulent depths of the colossi threatening to erupt at any second. It was then, on the fringes of the raging debates, that isolated, disdainfully silent mini-malist hypotheses began to be put forward, proclaiming that even if the notorious "contact" with the "intelligent monster" could not be established, research into the ossifying mimoid cities and balloon-like mountains that the ocean throws out to be explored would still be possible, which the ocean throws out in order to reabsorb them, will probably bring valuable chemical, physico-chemical knowledge, new experience in the construction of molecule giants, but no one even entered into an argument with the proponents of such theses. This was, after all, the period in which the catalogues of typical metamorphoses, which are still valid today, or Franck's bioplasmic-mathematical theory of mimoids, which, although abandoned as false, remained a splendid model of thoughtful impetus and logical construction. These total thirty-odd years of 'Gravinsky periods' were a naïve youth, a vigorously optimistic romanticism, and finally - marked by the first voices of scepticism - the mature age of so-laristics. Already at the end of the twenty-five years, the hypotheses - as a recurrence of the first, colloid-wo-mechanistic ones - of the apsychicity of the sola-ryan ocean were put forward as their late offspring. Any search for manifestations of conscious will, for teleological processes, for action motivated by the ocean's intrinsic needs, was almost universally acknowledged as some aberration of an entire generation of researchers. The publicist's passion for debunking their claims prepared the ground for the sober, analytically-minded, fact-focused inquiries of the Holden, Eonides, Stoliwa group; it was a time of rapid swelling and proliferation of archives, microfilm files, expeditions, richly equipped with every conceivable apparatus, self-recorders, sensors, probes that Earth could provide. In some years, more than a thousand people participated in the research at the same time, but while the rate of accumulation of materials was still increasing, the spirit animating the scientists was already waning, and a period of decline was beginning, difficult to distinguish in time, in this still optimistic phase of Solarian exploration.
It was characterised above all by the great, courageous - at times with theoretical imagination, at times with negation - individualities of people such as Giese, Strobla or Sevada, who, the last of the great solarists, died in mysterious circumstances near the south pole of the planet, having done something that does not even occur to a novice. He guided his gliding camera low over the ocean in front of hundreds of observers into the depths of the chige, which was clearly out of his way. There was talk of some kind of sudden weakness, fainting or rudder defect, in fact it was, I think, the first suicide, the first sudden, overt outburst of despair.
Not the last, however. But Gravinsky's volume contained no such data; it was I myself who added dates, facts and details as I gazed into its yellowed pages, covered in fine print. There were no more such pathetic attempts on one's own life afterwards, nor were there any more of these great individuals. The recruitment of researchers, devoting themselves to a specific field of planetology, is actually a phenomenon not studied by anyone. People of great ability and great strength of character are born with more or less constant frequency, only their selection is uneven. Their presence or absence in a particular field of research may perhaps explain the perspectives it opens up. Although the classics of solar science can be judged in different ways, no one can deny their greatness, sometimes their genius. The best mathematicians, physicists, excellence in biophysics, information theory, electrophysiology were attracted to the silent giant of solar science for decades. Suddenly, the army of researchers was stripped away year after year, as if the chiefs. What remained was a grey, nameless crowd of patient collectors, compilers, creators of many an original experiment, but there was a lack of both mass expeditions, intended on a global scale, and bold, unifying hypotheses.
Solaristics seemed to be falling apart and, as if as a secondary, parallel to its downward flight, there were massively conceived hypotheses, barely differing in secondary details, about the degeneration, degeneration, involution of the solar seas. From time to time a bolder, more interesting take appeared, but all of them judged, as it were, the ocean, recognised as the final product of a development that had long ago, millennia ago, undergone a period of supreme organisation and was now, fused only physically, disintegrating into a multitude of unnecessary, meaningless, agonal creations. So already a monumental, centuries-long agony; This is how Solaris was perceived, by looking for signs of new creation in the longons or mimoids, by looking for manifestations of chaos and anarchy in the processes rolling over the liquid body, until this direction became an obsession, so that the entire scientific literature of the following seven or eight years, although, of the next seven or eight years, although obviously devoid of terms expressing the overt feelings of its authors, is like a single pile of insults - a revenge taken by the lonely, leaderless, grey masses of solarists on the still uniformly indifferent, ignoring their presence, object of intensive research. 
I was aware of the original works of a dozen European psychologists, not included in this set of solar classics, perhaps wrongly, who had so much in common with solarism that over a long period of time they studied the reactions of public opinion, collecting the utterances of the most mediocre, the voices of the non-professionals, and thus demonstrated a surprisingly close connection between the transformations of this opinion and the processes that were simultaneously taking place within the scientific community.
Also within the co-ordinating group of the Planetary Institute, where the material support of research was decided, transformations were taking place, expressed in a continuous but gradual reduction of the budget of the institutes and solar facilities, as well as of the subsidies for the teams going to the planet.
Voices about the necessity of reducing research were mixed with speeches by those who demanded the use of more energetic means, but no one seemed to go further than the administrative director of the All-Earth Cosmological Institute, who insistently proclaimed that the living ocean by no means ignores people, it just doesn't notice them, just like an elephant - an ant walking on its back, and in order to draw its attention and concentrate it on us, it is necessary to apply powerful stimuli and ma-na-gigants on the size of the entire planet. The amusing detail was that, as the press mischievously pointed out, such costly undertakings were demanded by the director of the Cosmological Institute, not the Planetological Institute, which was funding the solarian exploration, so it was generosity from a pocket not its own.
And then the circle of hypotheses, the refreshing of old ones, the introduction of irrelevant changes, the clarification or, on the contrary, the ambiguisation began to turn the solar science, so clear up to then, despite its vastness, into an increasingly complicated labyrinth full of blind alleys. In an atmosphere of general indifference, stagnation and discouragement, a second ocean of barrenly printed papers seemed to accompany the solarist in time.
Some two years before I entered Gib-rian's studio as a graduate of the Institute, the Metta - Irving Foundation had been established, earmarking high prizes for whoever would harness the energy of the oceanic glee for human needs. This had been tempted before and more than one load of plasmatic jelly had been transported to Earth by spacecraft. Methods of preserving it have also been long and patiently developed, using high or low temperatures, an artificial microatmosphere and microclimate, solar-like irradiation for fixation, thousands of chemical prescriptions, all in order to observe the more or less lazy process of decomposition, also, it is understood, like everything else, described repeatedly with the greatest precision in all its stages - self-digestion, maceration, primary, i.e. early, and late, secondary liquefaction. Samples taken from all efflorescences and plasma formations also suffered an analogous fate. The only difference was in the paths leading to the end, which was represented by an ash-light, metallic shining, auto-fermentation diluted lichen. Its composition, ratio of elements and chemical formulae could be given by any solarist awakened from sleep.
The complete failure to keep alive - or even in a state of suspended vegetation, some kind of hibernation - a small or large particle of the monster outside its planetary organism gave rise to the conviction (developed by the Meunier and Prophet school) that there is in fact only one secret to be unraveled, and when we open it with a suitably selected interpretative key, everything will become clear at once....
In the search for this key, this Solaris philosopher's stone, time and energy were consumed by people who often had nothing to do with science, and in the fourth decade of the Solaristics' existence the number of combination-maniacs from outside the scientific community, these obsessives, with a fervour that beat their former predecessors, such as the prophets of "perpetual motion" or "squaring the circle", reached epidemic proportions, even alarming some psychologists. However, this passion died out after a few years, and by the time I was getting ready to travel to Solaris, it had long since left the pages of the newspapers and disappeared from conversation, as had the matter of the ocean. Setting Gravinsky's volume aside, I came across next to it, as the books were arranged alphabetically, a tiny pamphlet by Grattenstrom, one of the more peculiar efflorescences of Solaris writing, barely discernible between the thick spines. It was a work turned - in the struggle to understand the Extraterrestrial - against human beings themselves, against man, a kind of lampoon on our species, a furious work in its mathematical dryness by a self-taught scientist who, having first published a number of remarkable contributions to certain rather detailed and marginal branches of quantum physics, in this, his main, although barely a dozen or so pages long, most extraordinary work, he attempted to show that even the most seemingly abstract, most theoretical, mathematical achievements of science in reality only moved a step or two away from the prehistoric, coarse-sensory, anthropomorphic understanding of the world around us. Tracing in the formulas of the theory of relativity, the force-field theorem, in parastatics, in the hypotheses of the one cosmic field, the traces of the body, all that is there as a derivative and effect of the existence of our senses, the structure of our organism, the limitations and frailties of the animal physiology of man, he reached
Grattenstrom to the ultimate conclusion that no 'contact' between man and a non-human, ahumanoid civilisation can and will ever be possible. In this scathing attack on the entire species, not a single word of the thinking ocean was mentioned, but its presence, in the form of a contemptuously triumphant silence, could be felt under almost every sentence. At least, this is how I felt when I first encountered Grattenstrom's booklet. This work, by the way, was a curiosum rather than a solarianum in the normal sense, and it was in the classical book collection because it had been inserted into it by Gibarian himself, who, incidentally, had given it to me to read. With a strange, reverential-like feeling, I slid the thin, unbound even print between the books on the shelf carefully. I touched the fingertips to the greenish-brown 'Solarian Almanac'. For all the chaos, all the helplessness that surrounded us, there was no denying that, thanks to several days of experience, we had gained certainty on a few fundamental questions over which a sea of ink had been wasted over the years, for they were subjects of disputes barren by their inconclusiveness.
Whether the ocean was a living being could be doubted further by someone fond of paradoxes and stubborn enough. But it was impossible to deny the existence of its psyche, whatever could be understood under that word. It became obvious that he perceived all too well our presence above him.... This single statement contradicted the entire elaborate wing of the solaristics claiming that the ocean is a "world within itself", an "entity within itself", deprived, due to the secondary disappearance of the once existing sensory organs, that it knows nothing of the existence of external phenomena or objects, enclosed in a whirlwind of gigantic thought-currents, whose seat, bed and creator is its under two suns whirling abyss.
And further: we learned that he was able to synthesise artificially what we ourselves could not - our bodies - and even to perfect them by introducing into their sub-atomic structure incomprehensible changes standing, presumably, in relation to his aims.
So he existed, lived, thought, acted; the chance to reduce the "Solaris problem" to nonsense or to zero, the judgement that we are not dealing with any Being, and thus our defeat is by no means a defeat - all this fell away once and for all. Whether they wanted it or not, humans now had to acknowledge a neighbourhood which, though behind trillions of kilometres of vacuum, separated by a space of whole light years, lay in the paths of their expansion, more difficult to comprehend than the rest of the Universe.
We are, perhaps, at the turning point of all history, I thought. The resolve to give up, to retreat, either current or in the near future, might have taken hold; even the abolition of the Station itself I did not consider impossible or even improbable. However, I did not believe that anything could be saved in this way. The mere existence of a thinking colossus will never give people peace again. No matter how much they traverse the Galaxies, no matter how much they bond with other civilisations of beings similar to us, Solaris will be an eternal challenge thrown to man.
And another small, leather-bound volume strayed into the depths of the annuals of the 'Almanac'. I stared for a moment at the cover, darkened by the touch of my fingers, before I opened it. It was an old book, this 'Introduction to so-laristics' by Muntius, and I remembered the night I had spent on it, and Gibarian's smile when he gave me that copy of his, and the earthy dawn in the window when I reached the word 'end'. 'Solaristics,' Muntius wrote, 'is a substitute for space-age religion, it is faith clothed in the garb of science; the contact, the goal towards which it aims, is as vague and dark as the communion of saints or the descent of the Messiah. Exploration is an existential liturgy in methodological formulas; the humble work of exploration is an expectation of fulfilment, of Annunciation, for there are and can be no bridges between Solaris and Earth. This obviousness, like others: the lack of shared experience, the lack of concepts that can be communicated, Solarists reject, just as believers rejected arguments that refuted the basis of their faith. After all, what do people expect, what can they expect from 'establishing informational communication' with the thinking seas? A record of experiences, associated with an existence that does not end in time, so old that it probably does not remember its own beginning? A description of desires, passions, hopes and sufferings, released in the momentary birth of living mountains, the transformation of mathematics into existence, of loneliness and resignation - into completeness? But all this constitutes incommunicable knowledge, and if one tries to translate it into any of the earthly languages, all the sought-after values and meanings are lost, left on that side. Such revelations, worthy of poetics rather than science, are not what the "believers" are expecting, no, because they themselves, without realising it, are waiting for the Revelation, which would give them the meaning of man himself! Solaristics is thus a graveyard of long-dead myths, an efflorescence of mystical longings which human lips no longer dare to utter openly, in full voice, and the cornerstone hidden deep within the foundations of its edifice is the hope of Redemption....
But incapable of admitting that this is really the case, the Solarists painstakingly bypass any interpretation of the Contact, so that it becomes in their writings something definitive - and while in the original, still sober understanding it was supposed to be a beginning, an introduction, an entrance to a new path, one of many - beatified, it became years later their eternity and heaven....
Simple and bitter is the analysis of Muntius, that 'heretic' of planetology, dazzling in its negation, in its dismantling of the Solarian myth or, rather, of the Mission of Man. The first voice that dared to sound out, still in the confident and romantic phase of the development of solar science, was received with a total, ignorant, silence. This was all too understandable, since accepting Muntius' words was tantamount to crossing out solar science as it existed. The beginnings of another, sober, resigned one waited in vain for its founder. Five years after Muntius's death, when his book had already become a bibliographical rarity, a white raven, not to be found either in so-larian sets or in philosophical book collections, a school named after him was founded, a Norwegian circle in which, broken up by the individuality of the thinkers taking up his legacy, the serenity of his lecture turned into the biting, fierce irony of Erle Ennesson, and, in a somewhat trivialised edition, into the utilitarian solarism or 'utilitarianism' of Phaelan-gi; Phaelan-gi's demand was to concentrate on the concrete benefits that could be derived from research, without looking at some pipe dream, born of false hopes, aiming at civilisational contact, an intellectual communion of two civilisations. In the face of the relentless clarity of Muntius' analysis, however, the writings of all of his spiritual disciples remain nothing more than przy-czynarski, if not mere popularisation, with the exception of the works of Ennesson and perhaps Takata. He himself had already accomplished virtually everything, calling the first phase of solaristics - the period of the 'prophets', among whom he counted Giese, Holden, Sevada; the second he called the 'great schism' - the disintegration of the one Solo-rian church into a cluster of warring denominations, and he predicted the third phase - the dogmatisation and scholastic ossification that would follow when everything there was to examine had been examined. This, however, did not happen. 'Gibarian,' I thought, 'was right, however, to regard Muntius's liquidating argument as a monumental simplification that overlooked everything in solar science that contradicted the elements of faith, as it was decided by the perpetual temporality of the work, which promised nothing beyond a concrete, material globe orbiting two suns.
Wedged into Muntius's book was, folded in two, a yellowed quite print from the quarterly journal 'Parerga Solariana', one of the first papers Gibarian had written, even before he became head of the Institute. The title - "Why I am a solarist" - was followed by a succinct, almost dispatch-like enumeration of specific phenomena justifying the existence of a real chance of Contact. For Gibarian belonged to that, perhaps, last generation of researchers who had the courage to refer to the early years of splendour, optimism, and did not disavow a peculiar faith that transcended the limits set by science, as material as it was, because it trusted in the success of efforts, if only sufficiently persistent and continuous.
It emerged from the so-familiar, classic studies of bioelectronicists from under Eurasia, Cho- En-Min, Ngyali and Kawakadze. These showed elements of similarity between the image of the electrical workings of the brain and certain discharges, occurring within the plasma, that preceded the formation of such plasma creations as the early Polymorpha and the twin Solarids. He rejected overly anthropomorphic interpretations, all those mystifying theses of the psychoanalytic, psychiatric and neurophysiological schools that attempted to reinterpret into a glial ocean individual human disease entities, such as epilepsy (whose analogue was supposed to be spasmodic eruptions of asymmetries), because he was - of the proponents of Contact - one of the most cautious and sober, and suffered nothing so much as the sensationalism that, admittedly extremely rarely anymore, accompanied this or that discovery. A wave of similar cheapest interest was, moreover, awakened by my thesis. And here it was, out of print of course, stuck somewhere in one of the microfilm trays. I based it on the revealing studies of Bergmann and Reynolds, who succeeded in isolating and "filtering out" from the mosaic of colourful processes the components accompanying the strongest emotions - despair, pain, delight - and in turn juxtaposed these records with the discharge of ocean currents and detected oscillations and opacifications of the curves (on certain parts of the syme-triad canopy, at the base of immature mimoids, etc.) manifesting a noteworthy analogy. - manifesting a noteworthy analogy. This was enough for my name to appear imminently in the tabloid press under clownish titles like 'Jelly despairs' or 'Planet in orgasm'. But it worked out in my favour (so I thought, at least until recently), because Gibarian, who, like every other solar scientist, did not read all the works appearing by the thousands, especially those already new to the field, took notice of me and I received a letter from him. This letter closed one, and opened a new chapter of my life.
