Relentlessness, a sort of mute rage, had kept me standing in front of the calculator. Now, overwhelmed with fatigue, I no longer knew how to tilt a mechanical bed; forgetting to push back the studs, I hung on the handle and the bedspring collapsed in a single mass. I tore off clothes and laundry, threw them away from me, rolled up in a ball, then I let myself fall on the pillow. I didn&#39;t even bother to inflate it properly; I fell asleep without turning off the lamps. I opened my eyes, feeling like I had been dozing for a few minutes. The room was bathed in a red semi-darkness. I was less hot; I felt good. I lay there, covers pulled back, completely naked. The curtain veiled only half of the window and there, opposite me, beside the glass lit by the red sun, someone was sitting. I recognized Harey. She wore a white beach dress, the fabric of which was stretched at the tip of the breasts; her legs were crossed, her feet were bare; motionless, her arms outstretched – her arms tanned to the elbow – she looked at me under her black lashes. Harey, with his dark hair, slicked back. I gazed at her for a long time, peacefully. My first thought comforted me: I was dreaming and I was aware of dreaming. However, I would have preferred that she disappeared. I closed my eyes and tried to chase away this dream. When I opened my eyes, Harey was sitting across from me. Her lips were drawn back, in her usual way, as if about to whistle; but his gaze remained serious. I remembered my speculations the night before about dreams. She hadn&#39;t changed since the day I last saw her; she was then a young woman of nineteen. Today, she would be twenty-nine; but, obviously, the dead do not change, they remain eternally young. She looked at me with her still astonished gaze. I thought I was going to throw something at her head; yet, although it was a dream, I could not bring myself – even in a dream – to mistreat a dead woman. I whispered: &#39;Poor child, did you come to pay me a visit?&#39; The sound of my voice scared me, and the room, Harey, everything felt so real. A dream in relief, slightly colored… I saw a number of objects on the floor that I hadn&#39;t noticed when I went to bed. When I wake up, I tell myself, I&#39;ll check to see if these objects are really there, or if, like Harey, I only saw them in a dream… I asked, &#39;Are you planning to stay long? I noticed that I was speaking in a low voice, in the voice of a man who is afraid of being heard beyond the door. Why worry about eavesdroppers in dreams? The sun was rising above the horizon. Good sign ! I had gone to bed on a red day, which was to be followed by a blue day, followed by another red day. I hadn&#39;t slept fifteen hours without interruption… it was a dream! Reassured, I looked carefully at Harey. The sun lit it up against the light; the crimson rays gilded the velvety skin of her left cheek and the eyelashes cast a shadow across her face. She was really pretty. And I, even asleep, terribly precise: I watched the movements of the sun, waiting to see the dimple grow in this unusual place, lower than the corner of the lips. However, I would have preferred to wake up. I had to get to work. I clenched my eyelids. I heard a creak. Immediately, I opened my eyes. Harey was sitting next to me on the bed; she continued to look at me gravely. I smile at him; she smiled and leaned over. We embraced; a first timid kiss, a kiss of children. Then more kisses. I kissed her for a long time. Could I thus enjoy a dream? I wondered. I did not betray her memory, it was of her that I dreamed, of her alone. This had never happened to me before… We weren&#39;t talking. I remained lying on my back; when she lifted her face, I saw her diaphanous nostrils, whose quiverings I had learned to interpret. With my fingertips, I caressed the conch of her ear, where the blood had rushed under my kisses. Was it then that I started to worry? I kept telling myself it was a dream, but my heart sank. I flexed my muscles to jump out of bed; I was almost certain to fail, because in dreams, very often, our numbed body slips away, refuses to obey; I hoped, nevertheless, that this attempt would arouse me from sleep. I did not wake up; I sat down, my legs dangling. Nothing to do, I had to endure this dream until the end… My good mood was gone. I was scared. I asked, “What – I cleared my throat – what do you want? My bare feet felt the ground, looking for a pair of mules. A sharp edge abruptly stopped my toe; I stifled a cry. With satisfaction, I thought that this cry would wake me up, and I remembered that I had no mules! But it went on… Harey backed away; she was leaning against the bed rail. The throbbing heart gently lifted the dress at the tip of the left breast. Harey watched me with quiet interest. Quick, a shower! Then I tell myself that a shower, in a dream, would not interrupt sleep ... - Where are you from? She grabbed my hand, with a gesture that I knew well, threw it in the air, caught it, fiddled with her fingers and replied: &#39;I don&#39;t know. You are angry ? It was his voice, his voice with deep intonations, his voice a little absent. She always spoke like that – sounding like she didn&#39;t care much about the words she was saying, like she was already preoccupied with something else. People thought she was thoughtless, or insolent, because her gaze never changed from an expression of vague astonishment. &quot;Did… who saw you?&quot; - I do not know. I arrived uneventful. Chris, is it important? She continued to fiddle with my fingers, but her scowling face was no longer participating in the game. “Harey…” “What, honey? &quot;How did you know where I was?&quot; She thinks. A smile – her lips the color of cherries – showed her teeth: - No idea! It&#39;s funny is not it ? When I came in, you were sleeping. I didn&#39;t wake you up. I didn&#39;t wake you up, because you&#39;re throwing a tantrum. You have a bad temper… She squeezed my hand harder. &quot;Did you go downstairs?&quot; — Yes, it&#39;s all frozen. I spun! She let go of my hand. She stretched out, her head thrown back, all her hair pushed back to the same side, and she looked at me with that half-smile that had irritated me before seducing me. I stammered, &quot;But… Harey… but…&quot; I leaned over her and rolled up the short sleeve of her dress. There, above the flower-shaped scar left by the smallpox vaccination, there was a red dot, a trace of an injection. I was not surprised (instinctively, I forced myself to probe the implausible to bring together the shreds of a coherent truth) and yet I felt dizzy. I touched that red dot with my finger, which I still dreamed of after so many years, which I had so often dreamed of, immediately waking up with a groan and still finding myself in the same position, bent double among the crumpled sheets, finding myself as I had found her, her, already almost cold, because, while sleeping, I tried to relive what she had experienced, as if, beyond time, I had hoped to obtain her forgiveness or to keep her company for the last few minutes as she felt the effects of the injection and terror washed over her. She, who dreaded a simple scratch, who could not bear the pain, nor the sight of blood, she had deliberately committed this horrible action, leaving only a few scribbled words for me. I had kept his note in my wallet, a faded note, with worn folds, which I never parted with; I didn&#39;t have the courage to get rid of it. So many times, I had imagined her writing these words, getting ready to act... I convinced myself that she had put on a comedy, that she had only wanted to frighten me and that the dose, following an error, had proved too strong. Everyone suggested to me that it had happened that way, or that it had been a hasty decision, brought on by depression, sudden depression. People didn&#39;t know what I had told him five days earlier; they didn&#39;t know that, in order to reach her more cruelly, I had taken my things away, and that she, when I was packing my suitcases, had asked very calmly: &quot;Do you know what that means?&quot; And I had pretended not to understand, even though I understood perfectly, but I judged that she was a coward; besides, I had told her… And now, she was lying across the bed and she was looking at me attentively, as if she didn&#39;t know that it was I who had killed her. She asked: - Yes, then? His eyes reflected the red sun; the whole room was red. Harey gazed at her arm with interest, because I had watched it for so long, and when I pulled back, she rested a cool, smooth cheek in the palm of my hand. I stammered, “Harey…it&#39;s impossible…” “Shut up! I could make out the movement of his eyes, under the closed eyelids. &quot;Where are we, Harey?&quot; — With us. - Where is it ? One eye opened and closed instantly; the long eyelashes had tickled my palm. - Chris! - What ? - I am well. Looking up, I saw part of the bed in the mirror above the sink: a loose fall of hair, Harey&#39;s hair, and my bare knees. With the tip of my foot, I attracted one of the shapeless objects that I had taken out of the box; I picked it up with my free hand. A rod had melted into a needle. I applied the tip to my skin and dug it in, next to a small pink scar. Pain ran through my entire body. I watched the blood flowing, dripping down my inner thigh and dripping soundlessly onto the floor. What good, what good… Terrifying thoughts assailed me, distinctly worded thoughts. I had stopped telling myself: “It&#39;s a dream. I no longer believed in a dream. I was like, “I have to defend myself. I examined her shoulders, the hips molded in light canvas, the bare feet dangling… I bowed, gently grasping an ankle, then running my fingers under the sole of her foot. The skin was soft, newborn skin. I knew, I no longer doubted, that it wasn&#39;t Harey and I was almost certain that she didn&#39;t know herself. The bare foot twitched, a silent laugh swelled Harey&#39;s lips. “Stop…” she whispered. I carefully freed the hand that was supporting her cheek and stood up. I dressed quickly. She straightened up; she was looking at me. I asked him: &quot;Where are your things?&quot; And immediately I regretted my question. - My stuff ? - What, you only have this dress? From now on, I continued the game lucidly. I tried to behave carelessly, indifferently, as if we had parted yesterday – no, as if we had never left each other! She stood up ; with a familiar gesture, quick and sure, she pulled up her skirt to smooth it out. My words had troubled her, but she said nothing. For the first time, she surveyed the room with a curious, scrutinizing eye; then, perplexed, she replied: — I don&#39;t know… — She opened the wardrobe door ajar: Maybe in there? — No, there are only combinations in there. I found an electrical appliance next to the sink and began to shave, careful not to take my eyes off her. She walked back and forth, searching everywhere. Finally, glancing out the window, she approached me. “Kris, I have a feeling something&#39;s happened…” She broke off; I had disconnected the razor; I was waiting. - I have the impression of having forgotten something, she continued, of having forgotten a lot ... I only remember you ... I ... I do not remember anything else. I listened to him, trying to keep a straight face. &quot;Did…have I been sick?&quot; she asked. “Oh…yes, in a way. Yes, you have been a little sick. - Ah, of course, that explains my lack of memory. She had calmed down. I could never describe what I felt. When I watched him coming and going, smiling or serious, speaking or being silent, sitting down and getting up, my terror gave way to the conviction of having Harey there, in front of me, even as I corrected my judgment and that she seemed to me stylized, reduced to a few expressions, a few gestures, a few characteristic movements. She pressed herself against me, both fists pressed against my chest, at the birth of the neck: - Where are we, the two of us? Is it going well or is it going badly? - Couldn&#39;t be better. She smiled weakly: - When you answer like that, it&#39;s going rather badly. I said hastily: - What an idea! Harey, darling, I have to go out now, wait for me! – And I added, because I was beginning to be terribly hungry: perhaps you would like to eat? - Eat ? – She shook her head, tossing the billowing mass of her hair. – No… do you have to wait?… long? - An hour. - I am coming with you. - You can not come with me, I have to work. - I am coming with you. She had changed, it was no longer Harey at all: the other didn&#39;t impose her presence, no, she never imposed herself. - It&#39;s impossible, my little ... She looked at me, from bottom to top; Suddenly she grabs my hand. And my hand lingered, went up along a warm, full arm. Despite myself, I caressed her. My body recognized her body, my body wanted her, my body drew me to her, beyond reason, beyond all thought, beyond fear. Careful to remain calm, I repeated, “Harey, that&#39;s impossible, you have to stay here. A single word resounded: - No. - Why ? “I…I don&#39;t know. “She looked around, then looked up at me again. “I can&#39;t,” she whispered. - But why ? - I do not know. I can not. It seems to me ... it seems to me ... - She was looking for the answer, and when she found it, it was a revelation to her. - It seems to me that I must always see you! The decided tone did not lend itself well to the confession of a feeling; it was something quite different. This finding changed suddenly, although not apparent, the nature of my embrace. I held her in my arms; I looked her in the eyes. Insensibly, with an instinctive movement, I began to pull her hands back and, when they were joined, my gaze searched the room; I needed a tie to tie his hands. His elbows bumped; a powerful trigger followed. I barely resisted for a second. Thrown back and tiptoes barely touching the ground, even an athlete would not have succeeded in freeing himself; but Harey straightened his waist and drew his arms aside; his face, dimly lit with an uncertain smile, had not taken part in the struggle. She was watching me with quiet interest, just like when I first awoke. As if my desperate attempt hadn&#39;t moved her; as if she hadn&#39;t noticed anything; like she ignored my panic attack. Standing in front of me, she waited – serious, passive, a little surprised. Leaving Harey in the middle of the room, I walked over to the shelf above the sink. I was trapped in a senseless trap and I wanted to get out of it, no matter what! If I had been asked what exactly was going on inside me and what the events meant, I would have been unable to stammer three words. But I already knew that my situation was identical to that of the other inhabitants of the Station, that everything I had experienced, learned, or glimpsed, was part of a single whole, terrifying and incomprehensible. However, at the precise moment, I simply contrived to find a trick, to construct a means of escape. Without turning away, I felt Harey&#39;s gaze. Above the shelf, a small emergency pharmacy was embedded in the wall. Hastily, I examined the contents. Among the medicines was a bottle of sleeping pills; I uncapped it and threw four pills – maximum dose – into the bottom of a glass. I acted openly, not trying too hard to hide my actions from Harey. Why ? I didn&#39;t ask myself the question. I fill the glass with hot water. When the tablets were dissolved, I walked over to Harey, who had remained standing. She asked me in a low voice: - Are you angry? - No. Drink that! I had unconsciously expected that she would obey me. Indeed, she silently accepted the glass and drank the hot liquid in one gulp. I put the empty glass on a stool, then I went to sit in the corner of the room, between the cupboard and the bookcase. Harey joined me; she sat down on the floor in her usual way, her legs bent, and with another familiar movement she tossed her hair back. I was no longer mistaken, it wasn&#39;t her; yet I recognized her by her least habits. Horror constricted my throat. And the worst thing was that I had to trick her, pretend to take her for Harey, when she herself, in good faith, believed she was Harey – I was sure of that, if any certainty could still exist! She had leaned against my knees, her hair brushed my motionless hand; we stayed like that for a long time. From time to time, I glanced at my watch. Half an hour passed; the sleeping pill should have started to work. Harey mumbled something. - What are you saying ? She was silent. I attributed his silence to the torpor of sleep; but, in truth, I secretly doubted the effectiveness of the tablets. Why ? I didn&#39;t have an answer to this question either. Because my subterfuge, probably, seemed too easy to me. Slowly, her head slid down my lap, dark hair covering her face entirely; she was breathing steadily; she was sleeping. I bent down to carry her to the bed. Immediately opening her eyes, she grabbed my neck and burst into a high-pitched laugh. I was stunned. Harey couldn&#39;t hold back his joy. Eyelids close together, she watched me, looking both naive and clever. I sat down again, stiff, bewildered, distraught. A last burst of laughter agitated her, then she snuggled up against my legs. In a toneless voice, I asked: &quot;Why are you laughing?&quot; His face again expressed worried astonishment. Obviously, she wanted to give me an honest explanation. She rubbed her little nose and sighed. &quot;I don&#39;t know,&quot; she finally said, genuinely surprised. I behave like an idiot, don&#39;t I?... But you, too, look like a famous idiot, stuffy like... like Pelvis. I seemed to have misheard: &quot;Like who?&quot; &quot;Like Pelvis, you know, the big... Harey, there was no way he could have known Pelvis, or heard me talk about him, for the simple reason that he had returned from an expedition three years after she was dead. I had not known him before, and I was therefore unaware that he had an inveterate tendency, when he chaired the meetings of the Institute, to prolong the sessions indefinitely. His name was Pelle Villis, and until his return I didn&#39;t know that, by contraction, he had been nicknamed Pelvis. Harey leaned his elbows on my knees and looked me in the eye. I put my hands on his arms, I went up towards the shoulders and up to the birth of the neck; the low-cut dress bared the skin, which throbbed under my fingers. One could assume that I was caressing her; moreover, judging from her look, she did not interpret the touch of my hands otherwise. In fact, I noticed once again that his body was warm to the touch, an ordinary human body, with muscles, bones, joints. Gazing quietly into his eyes, I felt the awful desire to suddenly tighten my fingers. Suddenly I remembered Snaut&#39;s bloody hands; I let go. Harey said quietly, “How you look at me… My heart was pounding so hard I couldn&#39;t speak; I closed my eyelids. Immediately, from start to finish and in detail, I designed an action plan. Without wasting a moment, I stood up. “I have to get out, Harey. If you absolutely want to come with me, I&#39;ll take you. - Good. She jumped up. Opening the wardrobe and choosing, among the colored shirts, a combination for each of us, I asked: - Why are you barefoot? She answered in a hesitant voice: - I do not know ... I had to throw my shoes in a corner. I did not insist. “To put this on, you&#39;ll have to take off your dress. - A combination ... why? She tried to remove her dress, but a bizarre fact revealed itself: the impossibility of undoing a dress without staples! The red buttons on the bodice were just ornaments. There was no closure whatsoever, zipper or otherwise. Harey smiled, embarrassed. As if it had never been done that way, I picked up a kind of scalpel from the floor and I slit the fabric in the back, from the collar to the waist. Harey was able to pull her dress over her head. When she had put on her jumpsuit, which was a little too loose, and just as we were going out, she asked: &quot;Are we flying away?&quot; You too, yes? I just nodded. I dreaded meeting Snaut. But the rotunda was deserted; the door leading to the radio booth was closed. A dead silence, always silence, hovered over the space station. Harey watched my movements carefully. I opened a stall and examined the rocket; I successively checked the condition of the microreactor, the operation of the controls and the diffusers. Then, having rid the flared base of its empty capsule, under the funnel-shaped cupola, I steered the electric cart carrying the outgoing projectile towards the inclined track. I had chosen a small vehicle used for exchanges of material between the Station and the satelloid, and transporting men only on exceptional occasions, because it did not open from the inside. I had chosen it very precisely according to my plan. Of course, I was not planning to launch the rocket, but I was simulating the preparations for a real departure. Harey, who had accompanied me so many times on my travels, knew a little about preliminary maneuvers. I checked again, in the cockpit, the proper functioning of the air conditioning and the arrival of oxygen; I plugged in the central circuit, the control lamps came on. I came out again and said to Harey, who was standing at the foot of the ladder, “Come in! - And you ? &quot;I&#39;ll come in after you.&quot; I have to close the hatch behind us. I didn&#39;t think she suspected the deception. When she had disappeared inside, I looked up into the opening and asked, &quot;Are you settled in?&quot; I heard a muffled &quot;yes&quot;, muffled by the cramped cabin. I bent down and with a single impulse I slammed the hatch. I pushed the two bolts fully; with the key I had prepared, I began to turn the five safety nuts. The sharp cigar stood upright, as if it were really about to soar through space. No danger threatened the captive; the oxygen tanks were full and the cockpit contained provisions; besides, I did not intend to keep her prisoner indefinitely. I desperately wanted two hours of freedom, so that I could concentrate on the decisions to be made and work out a common tactic with Snaut. As I turned the penultimate nut, I felt the three-pronged fork vibrate around the base of the rocket; I thought I had shaken the support by impetuously wielding my big key. However, when I took a few steps back, I saw a sight that I would rather not have to contemplate a second time. The whole rocket was shaking, shaking from the inside – and what shaking! A steel robot could not have impressed this convulsive tremor on a mass of eight tons, and yet in the cabin of the vehicle was locked only a slender young woman, a young woman with dark hair. On the polished casing of the rocket, the reflections of the lamps quivered. I couldn&#39;t hear the knocks; inside the projectile there was absolute silence. But the feet wide apart from the great pedestal vibrated like strings. The rhythm of the tremors was such that I feared seeing the whole scaffolding crumble. I turned the last nut with an unsteady hand, threw away the key and jumped down the ladder. Slowly backing up, I noticed that the shock absorbers, designed to withstand continuous pressure, danced furiously. It seemed to me that the envelope of the rocket was wrinkled. Like a madman, I jumped to the remote control panel; With both hands, I pulled up the engine start lever. Then the loudspeaker attached to the inside of the rocket let out a shrill sound - not a scream, a sound that bore no resemblance to the human voice, and yet I confusedly made out my name, repeated several times: &quot;Kris ! Chris! Chris! I had rushed at the controls so violently, with such erratic movements, that blood flowed from my scratched fingers. A blue glow, a pale dawn, illuminated the walls. Whirlwinds of vaporous dust swirled around the launch pad; the dust turned into a column of violent sparks and the echoes of a powerful rumble drowned out all the other noises. Three flames, immediately merged into a single pillar of fire, lifted the rocket, which flew through the opening of the cupola; a fiery furrow rippled as it sank. The shutters closed the orifice of the well; the automatic fans began to draw in the choking smoke that billowed in the room. My mind pieced it all together later; in reality, I don&#39;t know what I actually observed. Clinging to the control panel, my face cooking over high heat, my hair twisted and grilled, I sucked in jerks the acrid air, with hints of embers mingled with the ozonated scents of ionization. At the time of the launch, I had instinctively closed my eyes, but the blaze had penetrated my eyelids. For a while, I only saw black, red, golden spirals, which gradually moved away. The fans kept moaning; the smoke, the mist, the dust dissipated. I saw the greenish radar screen. Hastily manipulating the graduated knobs, I began to look for the rocket. When I located it, it was already flying above the atmosphere. Never had I launched a projectile so aberrantly and indiscriminately, without worrying about adjusting the speed and direction. I judged that the easiest way was to place the rocket in a circular orbit around Solaris, at a distance of about a thousand kilometers; I could then cut off the thrusters, whose range I did not know, and I feared a catastrophe with incalculable consequences. A thousand kilometer orbit was stationary – I made sure of that by consulting the chart. To be honest, it was no guarantee, but I couldn&#39;t imagine any other way out. I didn&#39;t have the courage to connect the speaker, disconnected immediately after the launch. No, I didn&#39;t want to expose myself to hearing that horrible voice again, which no longer had anything human about it. I considered myself entitled to think that I had conquered the simulacra; beyond appearances, I found Harey, the real Harey; out of respect for his memory, the hypothesis of madness would have effectively meant deliverance. At one o&#39;clock I left the space station.