
- Kris, is it because of this experience? The sound of his voice came to me in surprise; I stiffened. Lying in the dark, I was not asleep, I had not closed my eyes. For many hours, not hearing her breath, I had forgotten her. Lonely, I had allowed myself to be carried away by the confused current of nocturnal thoughts; pursuing the delirium of my waking dream, I had lost sight of the exact measure and meaning of reality. - What... how do you know I'm not sleeping? - When you're asleep, you breathe differently," she said softly, as if to make amends for her remark. I didn't want to disturb you... If you can't answer me, don't answer... - Why shouldn't I be able to talk? Yes, you guessed it, it's this experiment. - What do they expect from it? - They don't know themselves. Something. Anything. It's not "Operation Thinking", it's "Operation Despair". The truth is that one of us would have to have the courage to cancel the experiment and take responsibility for the decision. But most of us believe that such courage is nothing more than fear, and that to cancel the experience is to signal retreat, renunciation, a flight unworthy of man. As if it were worthy of man to wade, to get bogged down, to drown in what he does not understand and will never understand. - I stopped, but almost immediately a new fit of anger erupted. - Of course, they are not short of arguments! They claim that even if we don't succeed in making contact, we won't have wasted our time studying this plasma - all those living cities that emerge all the time.

They claim that even if we don't succeed in making contact, we won't have wasted our time studying this plasma - all these living cities that emerge all day long and disappear - and that we will eventually unlock the secret of matter. They know perfectly well that they are fooling themselves, that they are walking through a library where all the books are written in an incomprehensible language and where only the colour of the bindings is recognisable! - Are there no other planets like this one? - Maybe... we don't know, this is the only one we know. In any case, it is an extremely rare species - not like the Earth! Earth is a common species - the grass of the universe! - and we boast of this universality, we imagine that nothing can remain foreign to us. With this idea, bold and joyful, we set out for other worlds! And what were we going to do with these other worlds? To dominate them or to be dominated by them, that was the only thing on our unfortunate minds! Ah, what useless pain, what useless pain... I got up. I groped about in the medicine chest. My fingers recognised the broad, flat bottle containing the sleeping pills. I turned around in the darkness: "I'm going to sleep, dear. - Under the ceiling the fan was humming. - I must sleep, I must... I sat down on the bed. Harey touched my hand. I leaned forward and took Harey in my arms, and we lay there motionless, pressed against each other. I fell asleep. In the morning I woke up fresh and rested. The experience seemed a small matter to me; I could not understand how I could have attributed such importance to my encephalogram. Nor did I care that I had to bring Harey into the laboratory. In spite of all her efforts, she could not bear to remain more than five minutes without seeing and hearing me, so I had given up trying (she was even prepared to let herself be locked up somewhere) and, in asking her to accompany me, I advised her to take a book with her. I was especially curious about what I would find in the laboratory. The appearance of the big blue and white room did not seem to be very attractive.

The appearance of the large blue and white room was nothing special, except that the shelves and cupboards for storing the glass instruments seemed sparsely furnished; the panel of one glass door was slit in a star shape, and some doors had no panel at all. These details suggested that a fight had recently taken place here, the traces of which had been removed as far as possible. Snaut, who was working at a machine, behaved quite properly; he showed no surprise at seeing Harey enter and bowed slightly to her. I was lying down and Snaut was moistening my temples and forehead with saline, when a small door opened and Sartorius emerged from an unlit room. He was dressed in a white coat and a black radiation apron, which fell to his ankles. He greeted me authoritatively, looking very professional, as if we were in some great institute on Earth, two researchers among hundreds of other scientists, carrying on the work of the veil. His dark glasses were gone, but I noticed that he was wearing contact lenses, and I thought I could explain the inexpressive look. With his arms crossed over his chest, Sartorius was watching Snaut, who had put the electrodes in place and was wrapping a white band around my head. Several times Sartorius looked around the room; he ignored Harey. Curled up on top of a stool, leaning against a wall, she pretended to read her book. Snaut stepped back, and I moved my head, laden with metal discs and wires, to watch him make contact, but Sartorius raised his hand and spoke angrily: "Dr. Kelvin, I ask you for a moment's attention and concentration. I do not intend to dictate to you any precise thought process, for that would distort the experiment. But I insist that you stop thinking about yourself, about me, about our colleague Snaut, or about anyone else. Strive to eliminate all intrusions of definite personalities and concentrate on the business that has brought us here. Earth and

Solaris; the body of scholars as a whole, though generations have succeeded one another and man as an individual has a limited existence; our aspirations and perseverance in making intellectual contact; the long historical journey of mankind, the certainty that we shall continue that progress; our determination to renounce all personal feelings in order to accomplish our mission; the sacrifices we are prepared to make, the difficulties we are about to overcome... These are a series of themes that should be fed into your consciousness. The association of ideas does not depend entirely on your will. However, the very fact that you are here guarantees the authenticity of the development I have just presented. If you are not sure that you have done your job, please say so, and our colleague Snaut will start the recording again. As he said these last words, he gave a small, dry smile, but his eyes remained gloomy. I was trying to unravel the pompous phrases he had thrown at me with the utmost seriousness. Snaut broke the prolonged silence: "Shall we go, Kris? His elbow was on the control panel of the electroencephalograph and he seemed to be leaning casually on the back of a chair. I liked his confident tone, and was grateful that he had called me by my first name. I closed my eyes and said, "Let's go! When Snaut had fixed the electrodes and approached the control panel, a sudden anxiety had oppressed me; now this anxiety dissipated just as suddenly; through my lowered eyelashes I could see the red glow of the control lamps on the blackboard of the machine. I could no longer feel the wet, unpleasant touch of the metal electrodes, the crown of cold medals around my head. My mind was a grey, empty arena, surrounded by a crowd of invisible spectators, massed on bleachers, attentive to my

silence - and from that silence emanated an ironic contempt for Sartorius and the Mission. What was I going to improvise for all these inner spectators? Harey... I put his name forward uneasily, ready to withdraw it at once. But there was no protest. I persevered, I became intoxicated with tenderness and pain, I was prepared to endure long sacrifices patiently... Harey filled me completely; she had no body, no face; she breathed in me, real and imperceptible. Suddenly, as if superimposed on this desperate presence, I saw in the grey half-light the learned and professorial face of Giese, the father of solaristics and solarists. I did not think of the muddy eruption, the nauseating abyss that had swallowed up his golden spectacles and carefully brushed moustache; I saw the engraving on the title page of the monograph, the tight pencil strokes with which the draughtsman had haloed the head, a head that so closely resembled my father's - not in features, but in the expression of ancient wisdom and honesty - that finally I no longer knew which of the two was looking at me, my father or Giese. They were dead; neither of them had been buried - but in our time the unburied are not rare. The image of Giese vanished, and for a moment I forgot the Station, the experiment, Harey, the black ocean; immediate memories vanished before the overwhelming certainty that these two men, my father and Giese, now turned to dust, had once faced all the events of their lives, and from this certainty I drew a deep peace, which annihilated the shapeless crowd massed around the grey arena in anticipation of my defeat. I heard the click of switches; the light of the lamps penetrated my eyelids. I blinked. Sartorius had not moved; he was watching me. Snaut, with his back to me, was snooping about the apparatus, and it seemed to me that he was enjoying the clacking of the sandals which slipped off his feet. - Do you think, Dr. Kelvin, that the first stage of the experiment has been successful?" asked Sartorius in that nasal voice I hated. - Yes, I do.

- Are you sure?" he insisted with some surprise, and perhaps even distrust. - Yes, I am. For a brief moment, my assurance and the harsh tone of my answer triumphed over his stiffness. - Ah... well," he stammered, looking distraught. Snaut came over to me and began to unravel the bands around my head. Sartorius stepped back, hesitated, then disappeared into the dark room. I was stretching my legs when Sartorius reappeared, holding the already developed and dried film in his hand. Trembling lines drew a white lace on fifteen metres of shiny black tape. My presence was no longer needed, but I stayed. Snaut inserted the film into the oxidised head of the modulator. Sartorius, with a sad and wary eye, looked once more at the end of the tape, as if trying to decipher the contents of those vibrating lines. There was nothing spectacular about the start of the experiment. Snaut and Sartorius each sat at a control panel and operated buttons. Through the shielded floor I heard the muffled rumble of current in the coils; the light lines fell along the glass tubes of the counters, signifying that the body of the huge x-ray gun was descending to the opening of the shaft that housed it. The light lines stopped at the minima. Snaut raised the voltage; the white arrow on the voltmeter moved in a semicircle from left to right. Now the hum of the current was barely audible. The film was running, unseen under two spherical covers; numbers jumped with a slight tinkle in the footage indicator. I approached Harey, who was looking at us over her book. She glanced at me quizzically. The experiment had just finished; Sartorius was walking towards the big conical head of the apparatus. Harey's lips drew a silent question: "Are we leaving?

I answered in the affirmative. Harey stood up. Without taking leave of anyone, we left the room. A wonderful twilight lit up the windows of the corridor on the upper floor. The horizon was not russet and gloomy, as usual at this hour, but a shimmering pink, spangled with silver. Under the soft caress of the light, the dark valleys of the ocean had soft purple reflections. The sky was red only at its zenith. When we reached the bottom of the stairs, I stopped. I could not bear the thought that we were to be shut up in my cabin again, as in a prison cell. - Harey... I would like to see something in the library... do you mind? With somewhat forced animation she exclaimed: "Oh, no! I'll find some reading material... I was aware that since the day before, a gap had opened up between us. I should have been more cordial, overcome my apathy. But where could I find the strength to shake off this torpor? We went down the ramp that led to the library; in the small hallway there were three doors and flowers under crystal globes set against the walls. I opened the middle door, which was covered on both sides with synthetic leather - when I entered the library I always avoided touching this padding. A pleasant breath of fresh air greeted me; the large circular room, despite the stylised sun painted on the ceiling, had not warmed up. Distractedly caressing the spines of the books, I was about to choose, among all the Solaris classics, the first volume of Giese, in order to review the portrait on the title page, when I discovered by chance Gravinsky's work, an in -octavo with a cracked binding, which I had not noticed before. I sat down in an upholstered chair. Harey, sitting next to me, was leafing through a book; I could hear her turning the pages. Gravinsky's compendium, which students usually consulted as an aide-memoire, was an alphabetical classification of solarist hypotheses. The compiler, who had never seen Solaris, had stripped away all the

The compiler, who had never seen Solaris, had combed through all the monographs, expedition reports, fragmentary overviews and provisional papers; he had even fished out quotations from the works of planetologists studying other globes. He had written an inventory in which simplistic formulations abounded, grossly reducing the subtleties of the original thought; the work, conceived with encyclopaedic pretensions, was now little more than a curiosity. Gravinsky's compendium had appeared twenty years earlier, but since then so many new hypotheses had accumulated that a single book would not have been enough to contain them. I went through the index, which was almost an obituary list, for a small number of the authors mentioned were still alive; of those who survived, none was still actively involved in solarist studies. Reading all these names, measuring the amount of intellectual effort exerted in all directions, one could not help thinking that at least one of the hypotheses formulated must be right, and that the thousands of hypotheses put forward must each contain some shred of truth - that reality could not be entirely different. In his introduction, Gravinsky divided the first sixty years of solarist studies into periods. During the initial period - which began with the expedition sent to reconnoitre the planet - no one had, strictly speaking, formulated any hypotheses. Common sense" then intuitively accepted that the ocean was a lifeless chemical conglomerate, a gelatinous mass, which by its "quasi-volcanic" activity produced marvellous creations and stabilised its unstable orbit by a self-generating mechanical process, in the same way that a pendulum maintains itself on a fixed plane after being set in motion. In fact, three years after the first expedition, Magenon had put forward the idea that the 'colloidal machine' was alive; but Gravinsky's period of biological hypotheses did not begin until nine years later, when Magenon's previously discarded opinion had gained many supporters. The following years were full of highly complex theoretical descriptions of the living ocean, supported by

biomathematical analysis. During the third period, the opinion of the scientists, which had been more or less unanimous until then, became divided. A host of rival schools arose and fought furiously. This was the era of Panmaller, Strobel, Freyhouss, Le Greuille, Osipowicz; the whole legacy of Giese was subjected to merciless criticism. The first atlases and inventories appeared; stereophotographs of asymmetriads, until recently considered impossible creations to explore, were presented - new remote-controlled instruments had been introduced inside these formidable behemoths, which could be torn apart by an unpredictable explosion at any moment. In the tumult of the discussions, the 'minimal' hypotheses were dismissed with contempt: even if we could not make that famous 'contact' with the 'reasonable monster', some felt, it was worthwhile to study the cartilaginous cities of the mimoids and the blown-up mountains on the surface of the ocean, for we could gain valuable chemical and physicochemical knowledge and enrich our experiments in the structure of giant molecules. But no one deigned to engage in controversy with the proponents of such theses. Inventories of typical metamorphoses were being compiled, catalogues whose authority survives today, and Frank was developing his bioplasmatic theory of mimoids - although it turned out to be inaccurate, it remains a superb example of intellectual impetuosity and logical construction. These first three 'Gravinsky periods' - thirty-odd years - this candid assurance, this irresistibly optimistic romanticism, was the youth of solaristics; already, with scepticism, the mature age was coming. Towards the end of the first quarter of the century, the old colloidomechanical hypotheses had found a distant descendant in the theory of the apsychic ocean. Opinion was almost unanimous in judging the viewpoint of a whole generation of scientists, who had believed that they were observing the manifestations of a conscious will, teleological processes, an activity

motivated by some inner necessity of the ocean. The press, in passionately refuting this view, cleared the field for the Holden, Eonides and Stoliwa team, whose lucid, analytically sound speculations focused on a careful examination of ever-accumulating data. This was the golden age of the archivist; microfilm libraries abounded; expeditions, some with more than a thousand members, were lavishly equipped with all the sophisticated equipment the Earth could provide - automatic recorders, probes, detectors. But as the materials accumulated at an ever-increasing rate, the very spirit of the research became bogged down and, during this still optimistic period, a decline began. Courageous men such as Giese, Strobel and Sevada, who were daring in their affirmation or negation of a theoretical conception, had left their mark on this first phase of solaristics. Sevada, the last of the great solarists, disappeared inexplicably near the planet's south pole. Apparently, he was the victim of an imprudence that even a novice would not have committed. Hovering at low altitude over the ocean, in front of a hundred observers, he had flown his plane into an agilus, which was not in his way. There was talk of a sudden weakness, a fainting spell, a failure of the control system; in reality, in my opinion, this was the first suicide, a first and sudden crisis of despair. There were other 'crises', but Gravinsky's book did not mention them. Contemplating the yellowed pages, covered with tight print, I found in myself the facts, the dates, the details that I knew. Later on, moreover, the manifestations of despair were fortunately less violent - outstanding personalities were also rarer among scholars. The recruitment of scientists to study a particular field of planetology has never been studied as a phenomenon in itself! Each generation has a roughly constant number of men with brilliant minds and great

of character; only the paths they take differ. The presence or absence of such men in a given sector of research is undoubtedly explained by the perspectives that this sector opens up for the scientific process. The researchers of the classical solaristic era can be appreciated in different ways, but no one can deny their greatness, even their genius. For a few decades, the mysterious ocean had attracted the best mathematicians, the best physicists, the most eminent specialists in biophysics, information theory and electrophysiology. And suddenly the army of researchers seemed to be leaderless. There remained a grey and anonymous crowd of patient "collectors", of compilers, skilled in imagining a few original experiments; but there was no longer any succession of vast expeditions conceived on the scale of the entire globe, and no more high-profile hypotheses, stimulating by their audacity, were stirring up the scientific community. The monument of solaristics was deteriorating; like moss eating away at stone, hypotheses multiplied, differentiated only in secondary details, and unanimously embroidering on the theme of the degeneration, regression and involution of the ocean. From time to time, a bolder and more interesting conception would stand out from the mass, but always it was a sort of condemnation of the ocean, the final product of a development that had long before - thousands of years before - passed through a phase of superior organisation; the ocean now had only a physical unity and its multiple, useless, absurd creations were bursts of agony - a fantastic agony, to be sure, that had been continuing for centuries. Thus, the longus or the mimoids were tumours, all the processes observed on the surface of the enormous fluid body expressed chaos and anarchy... This way of considering the problem became an obsession; for seven or eight years, the learned literature poured out in courteous terms assertions which were, in spite of the oratorical precautions, nothing but a heap of insults - the revenge of a crowd of misguided solarists, deprived of leaders, against the object of their assiduous care, which did not depart from

indifference and stubbornly ignored all advances. A team of European psychologists had carried out a survey of public opinion over an extended period of time. Their report, indirectly related to solaristics, was not among the books in the Station's library, but I had studied it and remembered it well. By systematically collecting lay statements, the investigators had demonstrated in a striking way that changes in popular opinion followed very closely the fluctuations of opinion recorded in scholarly circles. In the coordinating commission of the Planetological Institute, which decided on material support for research, the change was manifested in a gradual reduction in the institutes' budgets and in the number of posts devoted to solar science, as well as in restrictions on the exploration teams. Some scientists, however, had taken the complete opposite position and were calling for more energetic action. The administrative director of the Universal Cosmological Institute went so far as to assert stubbornly that the living ocean did not disdain humans, but had not noticed them - just as an elephant neither sees nor feels the ants that wander on its back. To attract the ocean's attention and keep it there for a long time, powerful stimuli and gigantic machines designed to the size of the entire planet were needed. A piquant detail, which the press mischievously pointed out, was that the director of the Cosmological Institute generously invited people to dip into their pockets, since it was the Planetological Institute that should have financed these costly expeditions. Hypotheses continued to pour in - old ones 'refreshed', superficially modified, simplified or over-complicated - and solaristics, a relatively clear discipline despite its breadth, became an increasingly tangled labyrinth, where every apparent exit ended in a dead end. In a climate of

of general indifference, stagnation and discouragement, the ocean of Solaris was being covered with an ocean of printed paper. Two years before I began my internship in the laboratory of the department headed by Gibarian - at the end of which I had graduated from the Institute - the MettIrving Foundation, recently created for this sole purpose, promised the highest rewards to anyone who could find a way to use the ocean's energy. The idea was not new; cosmic ships had already brought many a shipment of plasma jelly to Earth. Patiently, various methods of preservation had been tried: high and low temperatures, micro-atmospheres and artificial microclimates, reproducing the atmospheric and climatic conditions of Solaris, prolonged irradiation... A whole arsenal of physical and chemical procedures had been deployed, only to observe in the end, and invariably, a more or less slow process of decomposition, passing through stages that have been abundantly described: consomption, maceration, liquefaction in the first degree, known as primary, and late liquefaction, known as secondary. The samples taken from the plasma efflorescences and creations suffered an identical fate, with some variations in the decomposition process; but, in the final stage, the matter always dissipated by self-fermentation into a light ash with metallic reflections. Any solarist could, however, establish the composition of the matter under study, specify the ratios of the elements and the chemical characteristics. The scientists having recognised that it was impossible to keep alive - or even in a vegetative state, in "hibernation" - any fragment, large or small, taken from the ocean and dissociated from the monstrous organism, the conviction was acquired (developed by the school of Meunier and Proroch) that the key to the mystery depended only on the way in which it was approached, and that when we had found the correct method of interpretation, the whole problem would be resolved. The search for this key, this philosopher's stone of Solaris, had absorbed the time and energy of a crowd of people generally lacking any scientific training. During

During the fourth decade of solaristics, a veritable epidemic had spread, which had moved the psychologists: an incalculable number of maniacs, of ignorant obsessives, devoted themselves to their groping search, with a zeal that surpassed that of the ancient prophets of perpetual motion or of the squaring of the circle. This passion, however, was extinguished after a few years. By the time I was preparing to leave for Solaris, the famous epidemic had long ceased to be mentioned in the newspapers or in conversations, where, moreover, there was little concern about the ocean. As I put Gravinsky's book back on its shelf - and I was careful to keep to the alphabetical order - I came across a thin pamphlet by Grattenstrom, one of the most bizarre authors of solaristic literature. I knew the pamphlet; it was a pamphlet, driven by a concern to understand what is beyond man, and specifically directed against the individual, man, the human species - the abstract, snarky work of a self-taught man, who had previously made a series of unusual contributions to some marginal, highly specialised areas of quantum physics. In this fifteen-page booklet - and yet his most important work! -the polemicist tried to demonstrate that the most abstract achievements of science, the most haughty theories, the highest mathematical conquests meant only a derisory progress, a step or two forward, compared to our prehistoric, crude, anthropomorphic understanding of the surrounding world. Looking for the correspondents of the human body - the projections of our senses, of the structure of our organism, of the physiological conditions that limit man - in the formulas of the theory of relativity, in the theorem of magnetic fields, in parastatics, in the hypotheses concerning the unified field of the cosmos, Grattenstrom had concluded that there was no question, and could never be a question, of any "contact" of man with an extra-human civilisation. In this pamphlet against humanity, there was no mention of the living ocean; however, between the lines,

one could feel its constant presence, its contemptuous and triumphant silence. Such, at least, had been my impression on studying this pamphlet, which Gibarian had pointed out to me, and which he had certainly added on his own authority to the Station's collection of classics - Grattenstrom's pamphlet being regarded as a curiosity, but not as a true solarianum. With a strange, reverent feeling, I carefully slid the thin pamphlet between the tightly packed books on the shelf. With my fingertips I caressed the bronze-green binding of the Solaris Yearbook. In a few days, we had undoubtedly acquired certainty on some fundamental questions, which had caused so much ink to flow and fuelled so many arguments that remained sterile for lack of arguments. Today, even though the mystery surrounded us on all sides, we had strong arguments. Was the ocean a living creature? We could not continue to doubt it, unless we indulged in paradoxes or stubbornness. It was becoming impossible to deny the 'psychic functions' of the ocean - whatever that term meant exactly. This alone invalidated the solarist theories that the ocean was an "inner world" - a "recluse life" - deprived by an involutive process of thought organs that had once existed, unaware of the existence of external objects and phenomena, trapped in a gigantic vortex of mental currents created and confined in the abysses of this monster rotating between two suns. Better still, we had discovered that the ocean could reproduce what we ourselves had never managed to create by artificial synthesis - the human body, a perfected human body, modified in its infra-atomic structure, in order to serve inconceivable purposes. The ocean lived, thought, acted. The "Solaris problem" was not annihilated by its very absurdity. We were indeed dealing with a Creature. The lost game was by no means lost... That seemed to be the final outcome. Whether we like it or not

Willy-nilly, men had to take into consideration this neighbour, from which they were separated by a void of trillions of kilometres and light years; a neighbour, however, situated in our expansion zone and more disturbing than the rest of the universe. Perhaps we had reached a turning point in history... What decision would prevail in high places? Would they order us to give up, to return to Earth, immediately or in the near future, would they even order us to liquidate the Station? It was not impossible, at least not implausible. I did not believe, however, in the escape solution. The existence of the thinking colossus would not cease to torment mankind. Even if man had explored the cosmic spaces in all directions, even if he had established relations with other civilisations founded by creatures similar to ourselves, Solaris would remain an eternal provocation. I discovered, lost among the thick volumes of the Yearbook, a small skin-bound book. I looked at the worn cover for a moment, it was an old book, the Introduction to Solaristics, by Muntius. I had read it in one night; Gibarian, with a smile, had lent me his copy; and when I reached the word 'End', the dawn of a new day on Earth lit up my window. Solaristics, Muntius wrote, is the religion substitute of the cosmic age; it is a faith, disguised as science. Contact, the goal of solaristics, is no less vague and obscure than the communion of saints or the return of the Messiah. Exploration is a liturgy according to the formulas of the methodology; the humble work of the scientists is only the expectation of an accomplishment, of an Annunciation, because there are not and cannot be any bridges between Solaris and the Earth. The comparison is obvious: the solarists reject the arguments - no common experiences, no transmissible notions - just as the believers rejected the arguments that undermined the foundations of their faith. Besides, what can humans expect, what can they hope for from an 'information link' with the living ocean? A catalogue of the vicissitudes associated with an infinite existence in time, and if

that it probably has no memory of its origins? A description of the aspirations, passions, hopes and sufferings, which are released by the chronic creation of living mountains? The promotion of mathematics to embodied existence, the revelation of fulfilment in isolation and renunciation? But all of this represents untransferable knowledge; transposed into any human language, the values and meanings sought lose all substance - they cannot be passed across the barrier. The "adepts" do not expect such revelations - of the order of poetry, rather than science - because, unconsciously, it is Revelation that they are waiting for, a revelation that would explain the meaning of man's destiny! Solaristics resurrects myths that have long since disappeared; it expresses mystical nostalgia, which men no longer dare to express openly; the cornerstone, deeply buried in the foundations of the edifice, is the hope of Redemption... Unable to recognise this truth, the solarists cautiously avoid any interpretation of Contact, presented in their works as a final outcome, whereas originally the lucid minds considered it as a beginning, an opening, a foray on a new path, among many other possible paths. Over the years, Contact has been sanctified - it has become the heaven of eternity. Muntius analyses this 'heresy' of planetology very simply, and bitterly; he brilliantly dismantles the solarist myth, or rather the myth of the Mission of Man. Muntius' work was the first discordant voice to be met with the disdainful silence of scholars, at a time when they still had a romantic confidence in the development of solaristics. How, indeed, could they have approved a thesis that denounced the very foundations of their work? Solaristics continued to wait for someone who would firmly re-establish its foundations and rigorously set its boundaries. Five years after Muntius's death, when his book had become the white bird of bibliophiles - almost impossible to find,

Five years after Muntius' death, when his book had become a bibliophile's whitebird - almost impossible to find in both solariana and philosophy libraries - a group of Norwegian scholars founded a school bearing the scholar's name; in contact with the personalities of his various spiritual heirs, the master's serene thought underwent profound transformations; It led to the corrosive irony of Erle Ennesson and, on a lesser level, to Phæleng's "utilitarian solaristics", or "utilitarianism", which recommended focusing on the immediate benefits that explorations could bring without worrying about any intellectual communion of two civilisations, any utopian contact. Compared to Muntius' relentless and clear analysis, however, the works of his followers are little more than compilations, or even simple works of popularisation, with the exception of Enneson's treatises, and perhaps Takata's studies. Muntius himself had already set out the full development of solaristic conceptions; he called the first phase of solaristics the era of the "prophets", among whom he counted Giese, Holden and Sevada; he called the second phase the "great schism" - the break-up of the one solaristic church into a host of antagonistic chapels; he foresaw a third phase, which would come when all had been explored, and which would manifest itself in scholastic and sclerotic dogma. This prediction, however, was to prove inaccurate. In my opinion, Gibarian was right when he called Muntius' attack a monumental simplification, neglecting everything in solaristics that was the opposite of a faith, since the work that was pursued unceasingly referred only to the material reality of a globe revolving around two suns. In Muntius's book I found a separate issue of the quarterly journal Parerga Solariana, yellowed leaves folded in two, one of the first articles written by Gibarian, even before his appointment as head of the Institute. The article, entitled Why I am a Solarist, began with a succinct enumeration of all the material phenomena that justify the chances of contact. Gibarian belonged to that generation of researchers who had the audacity to revive the optimism of

Gibarian belonged to this generation of researchers, who had the audacity to revive the optimism of the Golden Age and did not deny a strong faith, going beyond the boundaries imposed by science, a concrete faith, since it implied the success of persevering efforts. Gibarian had been influenced by the classical works of bioelectronics, to which the Eurasian school - Cho Enmin, Ngyalla, Kawakadze - owed its fame. These studies established an analogy between the diagram of the brain's electrical activity and certain discharges occurring within the plasma before the appearance of, for example, elementary polymorphs or twin solarydes. Gibarian rejected the overly anthropomorphic interpretations, all the mystifications of the psychoanalytic, psychiatric and neurophysiological schools, which tried to discern in the ocean symptoms of human diseases, including epilepsy (to which the spasmodic eruptions of the asymmetriads were supposed to correspond); for, among the defenders of Contact, Gibarian was one of the most cautious and lucid, and condemned sensationalist declarations - which were, in fact, becoming increasingly rare. Moreover, my own doctoral thesis had provoked some questionable interest. I was building on the findings of Bergmann and Reynolds, who had succeeded in isolating and 'filtering' the components of the strongest emotions - despair, pain, pleasure - in a series of very diverse processes. I had systematically compared these recordings with the current discharges emitted by the ocean; I had observed oscillations and noted curves (in certain parts of symmetriads, at the base of forming mimoids, etc.), revealing a noteworthy analogy. Journalists were quick to seize on my name, which was attached by a certain press to grotesque titles such as "The desperate gelatin" or "The planet in orgasm". This troubled fame had, however, a happy consequence (such was my opinion only a few days before); I had attracted the attention of Gibarian - who, of course, could not read the whole of the published solarist works - and he sent me a letter. With that letter, a chapter of my life ended; a new chapter began...
