The corridor was empty. It first led straight, then curved to the right.
I’d never been on the Station before but, as part of my preparatory
training, for six weeks I’d lived in an exact copy of it on Earth, at the
Institute. I knew where the aluminum steps led. The library was in
darkness. I felt for the light switch. When I found the first volume
of the Yearbook of Solaristics along with its Appendix in the index, a
small red light came on as I pressed the key. I checked in the register.
The volume had been checked out by Gibarian, along with another
book: the aforementioned Minor Apocrypha. I turned the light off and
went back downstairs. I was afraid to go into his cabin, despite the
footsteps I’d heard before. She could have gone back there. For some
time I stood outside the door, till eventually I gritted my teeth, got a
grip on myself and entered.
    The illuminated room was empty. I started rifling through the
books scattered on the floor by the window; at a certain moment I
went up to the locker and closed it. I couldn’t look at that empty
place among the overalls. The Appendix was not to be found by the
window. I went through each book in turn, till I got to the last pile
that lay between the locker and the bed. There I found the volume I
was looking for.
    I’d hoped to find some clue in it, and in fact, there was a bookmark
inserted at the index of names. Underlined in red pencil was a name
that meant nothing to me: André Berton. It appeared on two different
pages. I found the first of these and learned that Berton had been
the co-pilot on Shannahan’s ship. The next mention of his name was
over a hundred pages later. Immediately after landing, the expedition
had proceeded with extreme caution, but when after sixteen days
it transpired that the plasmic ocean not only showed no signs of
aggression, but retreated from any object moved close to its surface
and, whenever it could, avoided direct contact with instruments or
people, Shannahan and his second-in-command Timolis lifted some
of the restrictions on activities that had been imposed as precautions,
since these restrictions seriously impeded the work that was to be
done.
     At that time the expedition was divided into small two- or three-
person teams, each carrying out flights over the ocean that were often
several hundred miles in duration. The sweepers that had previously
been used to close off the research area were left at the Base. The first
four days after this change of method went without any incident, aside
from occasional damage to the oxygen apparatus on the space suits,
since the exhaust valves proved susceptible to the corrosive effect of
the toxic atmosphere. Because of this they had to be replaced almost
daily.
     On the fifth day, or the twenty-first counting from the moment of
landing, two scientists, Carucci and Fechner (the first was a radiolo-
gist, the second a physicist), conducted an exploratory flight over the
ocean in a small two-person airmobile. It wasn’t a flying craft but a
boat that moves on a cushion of condensed air.
     When they failed to return after six hours, Timolis, who was in
charge at the Base during Shannahan’s absence, ordered the alarm
to be sounded and sent all available personnel out to search for the
missing men.
     By a disastrous coincidence radio contact was lost that day about
an hour after the search parties set out; this was caused by a large
sunspot on the red sun releasing a powerful burst of corpuscular
radiation into the upper reaches of the atmosphere. Only ultra-short-
wave equipment worked, allowing communication at a distance of no
more than twelve or fifteen miles. To make matters worse, before the
sun set the mist thickened and the search had to be interrupted.
     When the search parties were already on their way back to the
Base one of them found the airmobile no more than 80 miles from the
shore. Its engine was working and the craft was drifting undamaged
on the waves. Only one man, Carucci, was found in the cockpit,
barely conscious.
     The airmobile was brought back to the Base and Carucci was
given medical treatment. That same evening he recovered. He was
unable to say anything about what had happened to Fechner. He only
remembered that when they’d already decided to head back he had
started to have difficulty breathing. The exhaust valve of his apparatus
had been jamming, and at each inbreath a small amount of toxic gas
had gotten into his space suit.
     Fechner must have unfastened his seatbelt and stood up as he
attempted to fix the other man’s equipment. That was the last thing
Carucci remembered. According to the experts, the probable subse-
quent course of events had been as follows: as he worked on Carucci’s
oxygen pack, Fechner had opened the roof of the cockpit, probably
because it was low and cramped his movements. This was permissi-
ble, since on such craft the cabin is not hermetic anyway and merely
provides protection against wind and atmospheric conditions. Dur-
ing these operations Fechner’s own apparatus must have developed
a fault; growing light-headed, he had climbed up through the roof,
gotten onto the top of the airmobile, and fallen into the ocean.
     Such is the story of the ocean’s first victim. A search for the
body, which ought to have floated on the waves in its space suit, was
unsuccessful. Though it might have drifted: it was beyond the expe-
dition’s capabilities to comb thousands of square miles of undulating
emptiness almost permanently covered with stretches of mist.
     To return to the previous events, by nightfall all the search teams
had returned, with the exception of a large freight helicopter that
Berton had taken.
     He appeared over the Base almost an hour after darkness had
fallen, when there were already serious fears for his safety. He was in
a state of nervous shock; he climbed out of the helicopter unaided,
only to try to run away. Restrained, he shouted and wept; in a man
with seventeen years’ experience of space flight, often in the most
punishing conditions, this was quite extraordinary.
     The doctors suspected that Berton too was suffering from poison-
ing. Though he ostensibly regained his senses, he refused even for a
moment to leave the expedition’s main rocket ship; nor would he go
up to the window, from which the ocean could be seen. After two
days Berton declared he wished to submit a report concerning his
flight. He insisted, claiming it was a matter of the utmost importance.
When this report was examined by the expedition’s advisory board it
was determined to be the morbid product of a mind poisoned by the
toxic gases of the atmosphere. As such it was included not in the
records of the expedition but in Berton’s medical case history, upon
which the whole matter was closed.
     So much was said in the Appendix. I surmised that the heart of
the matter lay in Berton’s actual report—what it was that had led a
long-distance pilot to suffer a nervous breakdown. I looked once again
through the piles of books, but I couldn’t find the Minor Apocrypha.
I was feeling more and more tired, so I put off further searching till
the next day, and left the cabin. As I passed the aluminum stairs I
saw patches of light from above. So Sartorius was still working at this
hour! I decided I ought to pay him a visit.
     Upstairs it was a little warmer. There was a faint draft in the wide,
low-ceilinged corridor. The strips of paper across the air vents were
fluttering furiously. The door of the main lab consisted of a thick plate
of textured glass in a metal frame. The glass had been covered with
something dark from inside; light issued only from a narrow window
beneath the ceiling. I pressed on the bar. As I had expected, the door
did not yield. Inside there was silence, broken from time to time by
what sounded like the low hiss of a Bunsen burner. I knocked. There
was no response.
     “Sartorius!” I called out. “Dr. Sartorius! It’s me, Kelvin, the new
arrival! I have to see you. Open up, please!”
     There was a soft rustle, like someone walking on crumpled papers,
then silence again.
     “It’s me, Kelvin! You must have heard about me! I arrived a few
hours ago from the Prometheus!” I said loudly, positioning my mouth
close to the place where the metal door frame met the jamb. “Dr.
Sartorius! There’s no one else here, only me! Please open up.”
    Silence. Then the faint rustle again. A few clinking sounds, very
distinct, as if someone were placing metal implements on a metal
tray. Then suddenly I was thunderstruck. There came a series of tiny
footsteps, like the toddling of a small child—a rapid, hurried patter
of small feet. Perhaps. . . perhaps someone was just imitating it,
masterfully drumming their fingers on an empty box.
    “Dr. Sartorius!!” I yelled. “Are you going to open the door or not?!”
    There was no response, only that childlike pattering again, and at
the same time a few rapid, barely audible, long steps, as if the person
were walking on tiptoe. But if he was walking, surely he couldn’t
simultaneously imitate a child’s footsteps? Though what did I care,
I thought to myself, and no longer holding back the anger that was
building up in me I roared:
    “Dr. Sartorius!! I haven’t been traveling for sixteen months just to
be brought to a halt by some playacting of yours!! I’m counting to ten.
Then I’m going to break down the door!!”
    I doubted it would work.
    Gas pistols aren’t very powerful, but I was determined to carry out
my threat one way or another, even if it meant looking for explosives,
which for sure would be plentifully available in the depository. I told
myself I mustn’t give in. In other words I mustn’t keep playing with
these cards, marked with madness, that the situation had stuck in my
hand.
    There was a noise that sounded like someone wrestling with
someone else, or pushing something. The dark sheet covering the
inside of the door moved aside a foot and a half or so; a slender
shadow appeared in the lusterless frosted pane, and a slightly hoarse,
high-pitched voice said:
    “I’ll open the door, but you have to give me your word you’ll not
come in.”
    “Then why open it?” I thundered.
    “I’ll come out to you.”
    “All right. You have my word.”
    There was the faint click of a key turning in the lock. Then
the dark silhouette covering half the door carefully pulled the cover
back in place. Some kind of complicated maneuvers were carried out
inside—I heard what sounded like the creak of a wooden table being
moved—then finally the door opened just enough to allow Sartorius
to slip out into the corridor. He stood before me, shielding the door
with his body. He was extremely tall and thin; under his cream-
colored undershirt his body looked to be nothing but bones. He wore
a black scarf around his neck; a folded lab coat dotted with reagent
burns was draped over his arm. His narrow head was tilted to the
side. Almost half his face was hidden behind a pair of wrap-around
black glasses, so I couldn’t see his eyes. He had a long lower jaw,
blueish lips, and huge ears that were also blue and looked frostbitten.
He was unshaven. Red rubber anti-radiation gloves hung from his
wrists on loops. We stood for a moment, eyeing each other with
unconcealed animosity. What was left of his hair (he looked as if he’d
given himself a buzzcut) was the color of lead, while his beard was
completely gray. His forehead was sunburned, like Snaut’s, but the
color ended at a horizontal line halfway to his hairline. He’d evidently
worn some kind of cap the whole time he was in the sun.
    “How can I help you?” he said finally. I had the impression he
wasn’t waiting to see what I would say, so much as listening closely
to the space behind him, his back pressed up the whole time against
the glass pane of the door. For a good while I couldn’t think of how
to open without sounding foolish.
    “My name is Kelvin. . . you must have heard about me,” I began.
“I am, or rather, I was, Gibarian’s colleague. . .”
    His skinny face, crisscrossed with horizontal lines—this was what
Don Quixote must have looked like—was expressionless. The bulging
black surface of the dark glasses directed towards me made it ex-
tremely hard for me to talk.
    “I heard that Gibarian. . . passed away.” I paused.
    “Yes. How can I help?”
    He sounded impatient.
    “Did he commit suicide? Who found the body, doctor—you or
Snaut?”
    “Why are you asking me? Did Dr. Snaut not tell you. . . ?”
    “I’d like to hear what you have to say about the matter. . .”
      “You’re a psychologist, Dr. Kelvin?”
      “Yes. What of it?”
      “A scholar?”
      “Well, yes. What relevance does that have—”
      “I thought perhaps you were a detective or a police officer. It’s two
forty, and you, Dr. Kelvin—instead of seeking to familiarize yourself
with the work being conducted on the Station, which would after
all be understandable despite your brutal attempt to break into the
laboratory—you’re questioning me as if I were at the very least a
suspect.”
      I controlled myself, though the effort brought beads of sweat to
my forehead.
      “You are a suspect, Sartorius!” I said through clenched teeth.
      I wanted to needle him at any cost, and so I added unrelentingly:
      “As you’re perfectly well aware!”
      “If you do not retract that remark and apologize, Kelvin, I shall
bring a complaint against you in my next radio report!”
      “What am I supposed to apologize for? For the fact that, instead
of welcoming me, instead of properly briefing me on what’s been
happening, you lock the door and barricade yourself in the laboratory?
Have you completely lost your mind?! Are you a scientist or a coward?!
Eh? What do you have to say for yourself?!” I don’t know exactly what
else I said. He didn’t even flinch. Thick beads of perspiration were
trickling down his pale large-pored face. All at once I realized he
wasn’t even listening to me. He kept both his hands behind him, with
all his strength holding the door shut. It was shuddering slightly, as
if someone were pushing on it from the other side.
      “You. . . should. . . go,” he whined suddenly in a strange shrill
voice. “You should. . . for the love of God! Go now! Go downstairs,
I’ll come, I’ll come down, I’ll do whatever you want, but please go!!”
      There was such torment in his voice that, in a state of bewilder-
ment, instinctively I raised my hand to try and help him keep the
door shut, because that was evidently what he was struggling with.
But he gave a fearful cry, as if I’d threatened him with a knife, so I
began to back away. He kept shouting in that high voice: “Go! Go!”
and then: “I’m coming back! I’ll be back right away!! No! No!!”
     He cracked open the door and darted inside. I thought I caught
a glimpse of something gold-colored, like a shiny disk, at the level of
his chest. There now came a muffled commotion from inside. The
cover over the door was knocked aside, a large tall shadow flashed
across the pane, the cover was put back in place and nothing more
could be seen. What on earth was happening in there? There was the
sound of footsteps, the crazy ruckus broke off with a terrifying clatter
of glass, and I heard a burst of laughter from a child. . .
     My legs were shaking. I looked around me. Everything fell silent.
I perched on a low plastic windowsill. I sat there for perhaps fifteen
minutes; I couldn’t say if I was waiting for something or had simply
been brought to such a pass that I didn’t even have it in me to stand.
My head was splitting. Somewhere high up I heard a prolonged
grinding sound and at the same time the place grew lighter.
     From where I sat I could see only part of the circular corridor
that ran around the laboratory. It was located at the very top of
the Station, right under the exterior armor plating. For this reason
the outside walls were concave and sloping, with windows like loop-
holes set into them every few yards. The external shades were just
retracting, as the blue day was drawing to a close. A blinding glare
burst through the thick glass. Every nickel-plated piece of trim, every
door handle burned like a little sun. The lab door with its pane of
rough glass glowed like the opening of a furnace. I looked at my
hands, which lay in my lap and had turned gray in this ghastly light.
In the right I was holding the gas pistol. I had no clue when or how
I’d taken it out of its holster. I put it back. I knew by now that even
an atomic blaster would be no use. What could I do with one? Break
down the door? Force my way into the lab?
     I stood up. The disk descending into the ocean, looking like a
hydrogen explosion, sent a cluster of almost material horizontal rays
in my direction; when they struck my cheek (I was already walking
down the stairs) it felt like a red-hot brand.
     Halfway down the steps I changed my mind and went back up. I
circled the lab. As I mentioned, the corridor ran all the way around
it. After a hundred yards or so I found myself on its far side, outside
an identical glass door. I didn’t even try to open it. I knew it would
be locked.
     I looked for some kind of window in the plastic wall, even just a
chink; the idea of spying on Sartorius didn’t seem at all dishonorable
to me. I wanted to put an end to conjecture and learn the truth,
though I couldn’t imagine how I would understand it.
     It occurred to me that the labs were lit from skylights in the
ceiling, or rather in the exterior plating, and if I went outside I might
be able to see in from there. To this end I’d need to go downstairs
and get a space suit and oxygen tank. I stood by the stairs, wondering
if it was worth the effort. The skylights were likely made of matted
glass. But what other option did I have? I went down to the middle
level. I had to pass by the radio station. The door was wide open. He
was sitting in the armchair, in the same position I’d left him in. He
was asleep. At the sound of my footsteps he stirred and opened his
eyes.
     “Hey there, Kelvin,” he croaked. I remained silent. “So did you
find anything out?” he asked.
     “Actually yes,” I replied slowly. “He’s not alone.”
     Snaut made a face.
     “How about that. That’s something. He has guests, you say?”
     “I don’t understand why none of you will say what it is,” I put in
as if casually. “I mean, I’ll be staying here so sooner or later I’ll find
out anyway. So why all the secrets?”
     “You’ll understand when you have your own guests,” he said. I
had the feeling he was waiting for something and wasn’t in the mood
to talk.
     “Where are you going?” he asked sharply when I turned around.
I didn’t reply. The docking bay was in the same state as when I’d
left it earlier. My scorched capsule stood wide open on the pad. I
went up to the spacesuit racks, but I’d suddenly lost interest in the
idea of venturing out to the plating atop the Station. I spun on my
heel and went down the spiral stairs to where the depositories were.
The narrow corridor was cluttered with canisters and piles of cases.
The walls here were made of bare metal that glinted lividly in the
light. A few dozen yards and the frost-covered pipes of the cooling
apparatus came into view beneath the ceiling. I traced them back.
They disappeared via a thick plastic sleeve into a hermetically sealed
room. When I opened the heavy door, which was two hand-widths
thick and lined with rubber, a blast of cold chilled me to the bone.
I shivered. Icicles hung from a tangle of snow-coated coils. Here
too there were crates and capsules, under a thin layer of snow; the
shelves lining the walls were stacked with cans and yellow blocks of
some kind of fat packed in clear plastic. Further off, the barrel-vaulted
ceiling dropped lower. In this place there was a thick curtain glittering
with ice needles. I pulled it aside. A large elongated shape lay on
a pallet beneath a sheet of gray fabric. I raised the hem and looked
into the stiffened face of Gibarian. His black hair, with the gray streak
over the forehead, lay flat against his skull. His Adam’s apple jutted
upwards, breaking the line of his neck. His dry eyes stared straight
up at the ceiling; a cloudy tear of ice had formed in the corner of
his eyelid. The cold was so piercing I had trouble preventing my
teeth from chattering. Holding the shroud up, with my other hand I
touched his cheek. It was exactly like touching frozen wood. The skin
was rough with stubble, which poked through in small black points.
An expression of boundless disdainful patience had set on his lips. As
I lowered the edge of the cloth, I noticed that on the far side of the
body some elongated black beads or beans, arranged from smallest
to largest, were poking out from under the folds. All at once I was
petrified.
     It was the toes of bare feet seen from underneath. The oval
pads protruded somewhat. Beneath the crumpled edge of the shroud,
pressed flat against the pallet, lay the black woman.
     She was face down, as if plunged in a deep sleep. I pulled aside
the sheet inch by inch. Her head, covered in small tufts of bluish
hair, rested in the crook of her massive, equally black arm. The
bumps of her spinal column tightened the glistening skin across her
back. Her immense body showed not the slightest sign of movement.
Once again I looked at the bottoms of her bare feet and I was struck
by something odd: they weren’t flattened or squashed by the weight
they must have had to carry; they weren’t even callused from walking
barefoot, but were covered with a skin that was as thin as that on her
back or hands.
     I tested this impression with a touch that was much more diffi-
cult than touching the dead body. What happened then was quite
incredible: her body, subjected to a temperature below zero degrees
Fahrenheit, came to life and stirred. She drew up her foot like a
sleeping dog when you take hold of its paw.
     She’ll freeze to death in here, I thought to myself. But her body
was tranquil and not especially cold. I could still feel the soft touch
moving through my fingertips. I stepped back behind the curtain,
let it fall, and returned to the corridor. It felt extraordinarily hot
out there. Stairs led me out to right by the docking bay. I sat on
a furled parachute and took my head in my hands. I felt as if I’d
been beaten up. I didn’t know what was happening to me. I was
shattered. My thoughts seemed to be moving along the edge of a cliff,
in danger of falling off at any moment—annihilation or at least loss
of consciousness would have been a unutterable, unattainable act of
grace.
     I had no reason to go see Snaut or Sartorius; I couldn’t imagine
assembling into any kind of whole all I’d experienced, seen, touched
with my own hands up to this point. The only resort, way out,
explanation, was a diagnosis of insanity. Yes: I must have gone mad,
immediately after I landed. The ocean had affected my brain in such
a way—I’d had one hallucination after another, and since this was
the case, there was no point in wasting my energy on vain attempts
to solve mysteries that in reality did not exist, but instead I should
seek medical assistance, call the Prometheus or another ship from the
radio station, send an SOS.
     At this point something happened that I scarcely expected: the
thought that I had lost my mind calmed me down.
     I understood only too well what Snaut had said—if in fact anyone
called Snaut even existed, and I had ever spoken to him, because after
all, the hallucinations could have begun much earlier. Who knows if
I wasn’t still on board the Prometheus, struck down by a sudden bout
of mental illness, and everything I’d experienced to this point was the
product of a disturbed mind? Yet if I was sick I could get better, and
that at least gave me the hope of deliverance, something I couldn’t
remotely see being possible among the tangled nightmares of what I’d
lived through on Solaris in the space of a few short hours.
     What I needed to do, then, was to conduct some kind of logically
designed experiment on myself—an experimentum crucis—which would
show me whether in fact I’d gone mad and was at the mercy of phan-
toms created by my own imagination, or whether, however absurd and
improbable they were, these experiences were in fact real.
     I thought about it all as I gazed at the metal cantilever that sup-
ported the weight-bearing structure of the docking bay. It took the
form of a steel mast jutting from the wall and reinforced with convex
plates. It was painted willow green. In places, at a height of about
three feet, the paint was coming off; it had probably been scraped by
the rocket carts as they were moved that way. I touched the steel,
warming it for a moment with my hand, and tapped the rolled edge
of the protective casing. Was it possible for a hallucination to reach
such a level of realism? Perhaps, I answered myself. After all, that was
my area of specialization; I knew what I was talking about.
     But could such a critical experiment be designed? To begin with
I thought not, because my sick brain (if indeed it was sick) would
produce any illusion I required of it. After all, it’s not just in sickness;
even in the most ordinary dream we find ourselves conversing with
people we do not know in our waking life, asking these dream figures
questions and hearing their answers. When this happens, even though
the figures are in fact only products of our own mind, parts of which
have temporarily become detached and given a fake independence,
we still don’t know what words they will utter until, in that dream,
they speak to us. Yet in reality the words are concocted by that other,
separated part of our own mind, and so we ought to know them at the
moment we think them up and put them in the mouth of a fictional
character. Whatever I might plan and carry out, then, I could always
tell myself I was acting the way we act in dreams. Neither Snaut nor
Sartorius needed to even exist in reality, and so asking either of them
questions was pointless.
     It occurred to me that I could take some powerful medication, like
peyote for example, or something else that produces hallucinations or
graphic visions. Experiencing such things would prove that what I
had taken really existed and was a part of the material reality sur-
rounding me. But, I thought further, that too would not be the critical
experiment I was after, because I knew how the substance (which I of
course would have to select) ought to act on me, and so it could also
be the case that both the taking of the medication and the effects it
caused were equally products of my imagination.
    I was already thinking there was no way out of the vicious circle
of madness—after all, no one can think with anything but his brain,
no one can be outside himself to check whether the processes taking
place in his body are normal. Then suddenly I was struck by an idea
that was as simple as it was apt.
    I jumped up from the pile of parachutes and ran straight to the
radio station. It was empty. I glanced at the electric wall clock.
It was coming up to four in the agreed-upon night of the Station,
because outside a red dawn was breaking. I quickly turned on the
long-distance radio equipment, and as I waited for the lamps to warm
up, in my mind I went over the various stages of the experiment.
    I couldn’t remember the call signal for the automatic station of
the planetary Satelloid, but I found it on the bulletin board over the
main console. I called it up in Morse code; eight seconds later came
the response. The Satelloid, or rather its electronic brain, reported in
with a repeated rhythmic signal.
    I requested it to tell me which meridians of the galactic canopy it
was passing at twenty-second intervals as it orbited Solaris. I asked
for figures to the fifth decimal place.
    Then I sat down and waited for the response. It came ten minutes
later. I tore off the paper printout with the results, stuck it in a drawer
(making sure I didn’t so much as glance at it first), then went to the
library and brought back large-scale sky maps, logarithmic tables,
the almanac of the satellite’s daily movements, and a few additional
books. I then proceeded to figure out my own answer to the same
question. It took me almost an hour to set up the equations. I don’t
remember the last time I performed such difficult computations—it
was probably in school, during my practical astronomy exam.
    I carried out the work on the Station’s huge calculator. My rea-
soning was as follows: from the sky maps I ought to derive figures
that were not exactly the same as those provided by the Satelloid,
since the Satelloid was subject to complex perturbations as a result
of Solaris’s gravitational pull, of its two mutually orbiting suns, and
also local variations in gravitation caused by the ocean. When I had
both sets of figures, those provided by the Satelloid and those calcu-
lated theoretically on the basis of the sky maps, I’d correct my own
reckonings. At this point the two groups of results ought to match to
the fourth decimal place; discrepancies would remain only in the fifth
decimal place, as being caused by the unpredictable influence of the
ocean.
    Even if the figures the Satelloid provided were not real but a prod-
uct of my own crazy mind, they still couldn’t match the other series of
numbers—even if my brain was sick, it would not be capable under
any circumstances of the computations performed by the Station’s
calculator. Such a thing would have required months of work. So
then, if the figures tallied, the calculator existed in reality and I was
actually using it, not just imagining I was.
    My hands were trembling as I took the telegraphic printout from
the drawer and spread it out next to the other, wider sheet from the
calculator. Both lists of figures matched as I had predicted, to the
fourth decimal place. Discrepancies appeared only in the fifth.
    I put all the papers into the drawer. So the calculator existed
independently of me; this meant that the Station and everything on
it was also real.
    I was about to close the drawer when I noticed it was filled with
a whole wad of papers covered in hasty calculations. I pulled them
out; a single glance was enough to see that someone else had already
carried out an experiment like mine, the only difference being that in-
stead of data from the star canopy this person had asked the Satelloid
for information about Solaris’s reflectivity at forty-second intervals.
    I was not mad. The last ray of hope had faded. I turned off the
transmitter, finished what was left of the bouillon in the flask, and
went to bed.