I was sitting by the big window and staring at the ocean. I had
nothing to do. The report, which had taken five days to write, was
now a bundle of waves speeding across the void somewhere beyond
the constellation of Orion. When it reached the dark dusty nebula
that extends across eight trillion cubic miles and swallows every signal
and light ray, it would hit the first of a series of relays. From there,
from one radio beacon to the next, in leaps of billions of miles it
would hurtle in a vast arc all the way to the last relay, a metal
container packed tight with precision instruments and equipped with
the extended muzzle of a directional antenna, which would compress
it one more time and fling it further into space, toward Earth. Months
would pass and an identical packet of energy, trailing a wake of
shockwave distortions through the gravitational field of the Galaxy,
would be shot from Earth, would reach the edge of the cosmic cloud,
squeeze through it, fortified by the series of slowly drifting beacons,
and with undiminished rapidity would speed on toward the double
suns of Solaris.
     Beneath the red sun the ocean was blacker than ever. A ruddy
mist melted the place where it met the sky; the day was exceptionally
hot, as if presaging one of those extremely rare and unimaginably
violent storms that strike the planet a few times a year. There are
reasons to believe that its only inhabitant controls the climate and
itself causes the storms.
     For several more months I would be gazing from those windows,
observing from high up the sunrises of white gold and oppressive
red, mirrored from time to time in some fluid eruption, in the sil-
very bauble of a symmetriad; following the journey made by slender
rapidos leaning into the wind; encountering half-degraded, crumbling
mimoids. One day the screens of all the visuphones would start to
flicker, the entire electronic signalization system, long dormant, would
spring to life, set in motion by an impulse sent from hundreds of
thousands of miles away announcing the approach of a metal colos-
sus that would lower itself over the ocean with a prolonged thunder
of its gravitors. It would be either the Ulysses or the Prometheus, or
another of the great long-distance cruisers. When I climbed the ac-
commodation ladder from the flat roof of the Station, on board I’d see
ranks of bulky white-armored automats that do not share mankind’s
original sin and are so innocent they carry out any command, to the
point of destroying themselves or any object lying in their path, if
their memory, oscillating in crystal, is so programmed. And then the
ship would move off, noiselessly, faster than sound, leaving behind it
a cone of reverberations splitting into bass octaves as it reached the
ocean, and the faces of all the humans would brighten for a moment
at the thought that they were returning home.
     But I had no home. Earth? I thought about its great crowded
buzzing cities, in which I would become lost, almost effaced, as if I’d
gone through with what I wanted to do that second or third night—
thrown myself into the ocean where it rocked sluggishly in the dark-
ness. I’d drown in people. I’d be a reticent, observant, and therefore
valued, companion, I’d have many acquaintances, friends even, and
women, maybe even one woman. For some time I’d have to force
myself to smile, say hello, get to my feet, perform a thousand trivial
actions from which life on Earth is composed, till I stopped being
aware of them. I’d find new interests, new pastimes, but I wouldn’t
give myself over to them completely. Not to anything or anyone, ever
again. And, maybe, I’d stare into the night towards the place where
the darkness of the dusty nebula blocks the light of two suns like a
black veil; I’d remember everything, even what I was thinking now,
and with an indulgent smile in which there was a hint of regret, but
also of superiority, I’d recall my follies and my hopes. I absolutely did
not regard that “me” of the future as anything worse than the Kelvin
who was prepared to do anything in the cause of so-called Contact.
And no one would ever have the right to judge me.
    Snaut came into the cabin. He looked around, then stared at me.
I got up and went up to the table.
    “Did you want something?”
    “Am I right in thinking you don’t have anything to do. . . ?” he
asked, blinking. “I could give you, there are some calculations that
need running, not that they’re urgent or anything. . .”
    “Thanks,” I said with a smile, “but that’s not necessary.”
    “Are you sure?” he asked, looking out of the window.
    “Yes. I’ve been thinking about various things and—”
    “I’d rather you didn’t think so much.”
    “Then you have no idea what this is about. Tell me, do you. . .
believe in God?”
    He gave me a sharp look.
    “Come off it. Who still believes these days. . .”
    Unease flickered in his eyes.
    “It’s not so straightforward,” I said in a deliberately light tone. “I
don’t mean the traditional God of terrestrial beliefs. I’m no specialist
in religion, and I may not have come up with anything new, but do
you happen to know if there ever existed a faith in. . . a defective
God?”
    “Defective?” he repeated, raising his eyebrows. “How do you
mean? In a certain sense the god of every religion was defective,
because he was encumbered with human qualities, only magnified.
The God of the Old Testament, for instance, was a hothead who
craved servility and was jealous of other gods. . . the Greek gods had
just as many human imperfections, with their quarrelsomeness and
their family squabbles—”
    “No,” I interrupted him, “I mean a God whose deficiencies don’t
arise from the simplemindedness of his human creators, but constitute
his most essential, immanent character. This would be a God limited
in his omniscience and omnipotence, one who can make mistakes in
foreseeing the future of his works, who can find himself horrified by
the course of events he has set in motion. This is. . . a cripple God,
who always desires more than he’s able to have, and doesn’t always
realize this to begin with. Who has built clocks, but not the time that
they measure. Has built systems or mechanisms that serve particular
purposes, but they too have outgrown these purposes and betrayed
them. And has created an infinity that, from being the measure of
the power he was supposed to have, turned into the measure of his
boundless failure.”
    “Once there was Manicheism,” Snaut began hesitantly. The guarded
reserve with which he’d been treating me in recent days had disap-
peared.
    “But this has nothing to do with good and evil,” I interrupted him
at once. “This God doesn’t exist outside of matter, he’s unable to free
himself of it, and that’s all he wants. . .”
    “I don’t know any religion like that,” he said after a moment of
silence. “Such a religion was never. . . necessary. If I understand you
correctly, and I’m afraid I do, then you’re thinking about an evolv-
ing god who develops through time and grows, mounting higher and
higher levels of power toward the awareness of that power’s impo-
tence? This God of yours is a being who has entered godhood like
entering a blind alley, and when he comprehends this, he yields to
despair. Fine, but surely a despairing God is a human being, my
friend? You’re thinking about human beings. . . This isn’t just poor
philosophy, it’s even poor mysticism.”
    “No,” I insisted, “I’m not thinking about human beings. Perhaps
in certain features that might match the provisional definition, but
only because it’s full of holes. A human being, appearances to the
contrary, doesn’t create his own purposes. These are imposed by the
time he’s born into; he may serve them, he may rebel against them,
but the object of his service or rebellion comes from the outside. To
experience complete freedom in seeking his purposes he would have
to be alone, and that’s impossible, since a person who isn’t brought
up among people cannot become a person. My. . . one has to be a
being devoid of plurality, you follow?”
    “Oh,” he said, “right away I should’ve. . .”
    And he pointed out the window.
     “No,” I disagreed, “not that either. At the most as something that
in its growth missed an opportunity for godhood, having retreated too
soon into itself. It’s more of an anchorite, the hermit of the universe,
not its god. . . It repeats itself, Snaut, whereas the one I’m thinking
about would never do that. Maybe he’s coming into existence as we
speak, in some corner of the Galaxy, and before long, in a fit of
youthful intoxication he’ll start extinguishing some stars and lighting
others, after a certain time we’ll notice it. . .”
     “We already have,” said Snaut sourly. “ Novas and supernovas. . .
are they candles on his altar, according to you?”
     “If you want to treat what I’m saying so literally. . .”
     “Perhaps Solaris is precisely the cradle of this divine infant of
yours,” added Snaut. An ever more distinct smile was ringing his eyes
with little creases. “Perhaps in your conception this is the origin, the
seed of the God of despair, perhaps its exuberant childhood is way
beyond our comprehension, and everything our libraries of solariana
contain is merely a catalogue of his infant reflexes. . .”
     “And for a while we were his playthings,” I finished. “Yes, that’s
possible. You know what we just managed to do? Create an entirely
new hypothesis on the subject of Solaris, and that’s no small achieve-
ment! Right away you have an explanation of the failure to make
Contact, the lack of response, certain, let’s say, extravagances in its
treatment of us: the mind of a small child. . .”
     “I don’t need to put my name to it,” he murmured as he stood by
the window. For a long moment we gazed at the black waves. On the
eastern horizon a pale elongated smudge could be seen through the
mist.
     “Where did you get that idea of a defective God?” he asked
suddenly, not taking his eyes off the emptiness bathed in light.
     “I don’t know. It seemed to me very, very authentic, you know? It
would be the only God I’d be inclined to believe in, one whose suffer-
ing wasn’t redemption, didn’t save anyone, didn’t serve any purpose,
it just was.”
     “A mimoid,” Snaut said ever so quietly, in a different voice.
     “What was that? Oh, right. I noticed it before. It’s really old.”
     We both gazed at the misty red horizon.
      “I’m going to go fly there,” I said unexpectedly. “All the more
because I’ve been on the Station the whole time; this is a good op-
portunity. I’ll be back in half an hour. . .”
      “What did you say?” Snaut opened his eyes wide. “You’re going
out there? Where to?”
      “There.” I pointed at the indistinct flesh-colored shape looming in
the mist. “What harm could it do? I’ll take the small helicopter. It’d
be ridiculous if, one day on Earth, I had to admit that I’m a solaricist
who’s never set foot on the planet. . .”
      I went up to the locker and started picking out a set of overalls.
Snaut watched me in silence then eventually said:
      “I don’t like this.”
      “What?” I turned around with the overalls in my hand. I was
overcome by an excitement I hadn’t experienced in a long while.
“What’s the problem? Come on, cards on the table! You’re afraid that
I’ll. . . that’s absurd! I give you my word I wouldn’t. It hadn’t even
occurred to me. No, really no.”
      “I’ll go with you.”
      “Thanks, but I’d rather be on my own. After all, it’s something
new, something completely new.” I was speaking quickly as I pulled
on the overalls. Snaut went on talking but I didn’t really listen as I
hunted for what I’d need.
      He went with me to the docking bay. He helped me wheel out
the helicopter from its hangar into the middle of the launch pad. As
I was putting on my space suit he suddenly asked:
      “Does a man’s word still carry any value with you?”
      “For God’s sake, Snaut, are you still on about that? It does. I
already gave you it. Where are the backup canisters?”
      He didn’t say any more. When I’d closed the transparent cockpit
cover I signaled to him. He turned on the lift and I slowly rose to the
roof of the Station. The engine sprang to life with a lengthy growl,
the three-bladed rotor started spinning and the craft rose up, oddly
light, leaving behind it the ever shrinking silver disk of the Station.
      It was my first time alone over the ocean. The effect was com-
pletely different than what one experiences watching through the win-
dows. This may also have been because of the low altitude—I had
dropped to less than three hundred feet above the surface. It was only
now that I not only knew but actually felt how the alternating crests
and troughs of the vast expanse, with their oily glister, moved not like
a marine tide or a cloud, but like an animal. Constant though ex-
tremely slow contractions of a muscular naked torso—that was what
it looked like. The top of each wave flamed with red foam as it turned
over lazily; when I altered course to head directly toward the slowly
drifting island of the mimoid, the sun hit me in the eyes; there was a
flicker of bloody lightning in the convex windshield, while the ocean
itself turned inky blue with spots of dark fire.
     The arc that I described somewhat unskillfully brought me far
to windward, the mimoid left behind as a broad bright patch whose
irregular outline stood out against the ocean. It had lost the pink hue
the mist had given it; it was yellow as dry bone. For a moment I lost
sight of it, and instead I caught a glimpse of the Station in the distance
where it seemed to hang suspended right over the ocean like a huge
Zeppelin from the old days. I repeated the maneuver, concentrating
intently: the solid mass of the mimoid with its grotesque vertiginous
shape hove into view. I suddenly worried that I’d clip the topmost
of its bulbous ledges, and I brought the helicopter up so abruptly
that it juddered as it lost speed. My caution was unnecessary, as
the rounded summits of the bizarre towers sailed by far below me.
I guided the craft alongside the drifting island and slowly, foot by
foot, I began to reduce altitude till the crumbling peaks rose above
the cockpit. It wasn’t big. From one end to the other it measured
perhaps three quarters of a mile, and no more than a few hundred
yards across; there were some narrower places where it was likely
to break up before long. It must have been a fragment from an
incomparably larger formation; by Solaris’ standards it was a mere
splinter, a remnant, God knows how many weeks or months old.
     In amongst the stringy protuberances, right next to the ocean I
discovered a sort of shore, a few dozen square yards of rather steep
but smooth surface, and I directed the helicopter there. Landing
proved harder than I’d thought: I came very close to catching the
rotor on a wall that suddenly rose up before my eyes, but I nailed
it. I turned the engine off at once and flipped up the cockpit cover.
Standing on the wing, I made sure the helicopter wasn’t in danger
of slipping into the ocean; the waves were licking at the jagged edge
only a dozen or so yards from where I’d touched down, but the
craft stood firmly on its broad landing skids. I jumped onto the.
. . “earth.” What I’d taken before for a wall, the thing I almost
crashed into, was a huge osseous sheet, thin as a membrane and
honeycombed with holes, that stood vertical and was covered with
swellings that resembled balustrades. A gap several yards wide cut
across this whole multi-story surface diagonally and, like the large
and irregularly placed holes, showed what lay beyond. I climbed up
the incline of the closest span of the wall, discovering that the boots
of the space suit had an excellent grip, while the suit itself did not
hinder my movements. Finding myself four stories above the ocean, I
turned to face the interior of the skeletal landscape; it was only now
that I could get a proper look at it.
     The similarity to an ancient city half in ruins, to an exotic Mo-
roccan settlement from centuries ago that had been brought down by
earthquake or other natural disaster, was astounding. I could see with
the greatest clarity the twisting labyrinth of streets partially blocked
by rubble: their steep winding descent toward a shore washed by
clammy foam; higher up, the still intact battlements and bastions,
their rounded foundations; and, in the bulging or concave walls, the
dark openings like broken windows or defensive slits. The whole
island-city, leaning heavily to one side like a sunken galleon, pro-
ceeded in senseless motion, turning very slowly, as could be seen
from the apparent movement of the sun in the sky, which produced
a lazy play of shadow across the inner reaches of the ruins; at times
a ray of sunlight would slip through to reach the spot where I was
standing. I climbed higher still, at considerable risk, till a fine powder
began to crumble from the excrescences protruding over my head; as
it floated down it filled the crooked gullies and alleyways with great
billows of dust. A mimoid is of course not actual rock, and its resem-
blance to limestone ends when you take a piece in your hand—it’s a
lot lighter than pumice, small-celled, and hence extraordinarily airy.
     I was so high up now I could feel its movement; it wasn’t just
floating forward, driven by the blows of the ocean’s black muscles,
who knows where from or where to, but it was also tilting first one
way then the other, exceptionally slowly. Each of these pendulum-
like swings was accompanied by the drawn-out, glutinous sounds
of yellow and gray foam dripping from the shore as it rose away
from the ocean. This rocking motion had been given it long ago,
probably when it was born, and it retained it thanks to its huge mass.
Having observed as much as I could from my elevated vantage point,
I climbed carefully back down; it was only then, strange to relate, that
I realized the mimoid did not interest me in the slightest, that I had
come here to encounter not it, but the ocean.
     I sat down on the rough, cracked surface, a few yards from the he-
licopter. A black wave crawled sluggishly up onto the shore, spreading
and at the same time losing its color; when it retreated, the edge of
the previously untouched rock was marked with trembling filaments
of slime. I moved further down and reached out my hand to the next
wave. It faithfully repeated the phenomenon that humans had first
witnessed almost a century before: it hesitated, withdrew, then flowed
over my hand yet without touching it, in such a way that a narrow
layer of air remained between the surface of my gauntlet and the
inside of the covering, which instantly changed consistency, turning
from liquid to almost fleshy. I then raised my arm; the wave, or rather
its narrow tongue, followed it upwards, continuing to encase my hand
in an ever more transparent dirty green encystment. I rose to my
feet, otherwise I wouldn’t have been able to lift my arm any further.
A shaft of the gelatinous substance stretched like a vibrating violin
string, but did not break off; the base of the entirely flattened wave,
like a strange creature waiting patiently for the end of these experi-
ments, clung to the shore around my feet (also without coming into
contact with them). It looked as if a ductile flower had grown out of
the ocean, its calyx encircling my fingers in such a way that it became
their exact negative, though without touching them. I stepped back.
The stem of the flower shuddered and, as if reluctantly, it returned
toward the ground – elastic, swaying, unsure. The wave gathered,
drawing it into itself, and disappeared from the edge of the shore. I
repeated the game until at some point—like a hundred years ago—
one of the waves receded indifferently, as if having had enough of the
new experience, and I knew that I’d have had to wait several hours
to revive its “curiosity.” I took my seat as before, but as if changed
by this theoretically familiar phenomenon that I had provoked; theory
was quite incapable of conveying the actual experience.
     In the budding, growth, and spread of this living formation, in
each of its movements separately and in all taken together, there was
something one was tempted to call a cautious yet not timid naivety, as
it strove frantically and rapidly to know, to take in, an unexpectedly
encountered new shape. Then, in mid-journey, it had to withdraw
when it was in danger of transgressing certain boundaries established
by a mysterious law. This agile inquisitiveness was so utterly at odds
with the immensity that stretched to every bright horizon. I had never
before been so aware of its vast presence, its powerful, inexorable si-
lence breathing evenly through its waves. Staring in wonderment, I
was descending to regions of inertia that might have seemed inacces-
sible, and in the gathering intensity of engrossment I was becoming
one with this fluid unseeing colossus, as if—without the slightest ef-
fort, without words, without a single thought—I was forgiving it for
everything.
     For the whole of the final week I behaved so sensibly that the
distrustful glint in Snaut’s eye eventually stopped harassing me. On
the outside I was calm; secretly, without being fully conscious of it, I
was expecting something. What? Her return? How could I? Each of us
is aware he’s a material being, subject to the laws of physiology and
physics, and that the strength of all our emotions combined cannot
counteract those laws; it can only hate them. The eternal belief of
lovers and poets in the power of love, which is more enduring than
death, the finis vitae sed non amoris that has pursued us through the
centuries, is a lie. But this lie is not ridiculous, it’s simply futile. To
be a clock, on the other hand, measuring the passage of time, one
that is smashed and rebuilt over and again, one in whose mechanism
despair and love are set in motion by the watchmaker along with the
first movements of the cogs; to know one is a repeater of suffering felt
ever more deeply as it becomes increasingly comical through multiple
repetitions? To replay human existence—fine, but to replay it in the
way a drunk replays a corny tune, pushing coins over and over into the
jukebox? I didn’t believe for a minute that this liquid colossus, which
had brought about the death of hundreds of humans within itself, with
which my entire race had for decades been trying in vain to establish
at least a thread of communication—that this ocean, lifting me up
unwittingly like a speck of dust, could be moved by the tragedy of
two human beings. But its actions were geared towards some purpose.
True, even this I was not completely certain of. Yet to leave meant to
strike out that perhaps slim, perhaps only imagined chance concealed
in the future. And thus years amid furniture, objects, that we had
both touched, in air that still remembered her breathing? In the name
of what? The hope of her return? I had no hope. Yet expectation
lived on in me—the last thing she had left behind. What further
consummations, mockeries, torments did I still anticipate? I had no
idea, as I abided in the unshaken belief that the time of cruel wonders
was not yet over.
     Zakopane, June 1959 - June 1960
