I lay on my back with Harey's head in the crook of my shoulder, thinking of nothing. The darkness was filling in. I could hear footsteps. Something was building up above me, higher and higher, endlessly. The night, the night pierced me through and through, the night took possession of me, it enveloped me and penetrated me, impalpable, inconsistent. I was petrified and could not breathe, there was no air to breathe. Far away I could hear my heart beating. I gathered my remaining strength, my full attention, and waited for the agony. I waited... I shrank, and the invisible, horizonless sky, the formless, cloudless, starless space receded, expanded and grew around me. I tried to crawl onto my bed, but there was no bed, the darkness no longer covered anything. I pressed my hands against my face. I had no fingers, no hands. I wanted to scream, to shout... The room floated in a blue half-light, which surrounded the furniture, the shelves full of books, which erased the colour of the walls and of everything. A pearly whiteness shone through the window. I was drenched in sweat. I glanced sideways. Harey was looking at me. She raised her head: "Is your arm numb? The colour of her eyes had faded too; they were grey - bright, though, under the black lashes. - What is it? - I felt her whisper like a caress, before I understood the meaning of the words. - No," I said at last. Ah, yes!" I said at last. I put my hand on her shoulder; my fingers were tingling. She asked:

- Did you have a bad dream? I drew her in with my other hand: "A dream? Yes, I was dreaming. And you, did you not sleep? - I don't know. I don't think so. I didn't sleep. You mustn't let that stop you from sleeping... Why are you looking at me like that? I closed my eyes. His heart was beating against my heart. His heart? Just an accessory, I thought. But nothing surprised me anymore, not even my own indifference. I had crossed the boundaries of fear and despair. I had come so far - no one had ever come so far! My lips brushed her neck; I went down to the cavity between the tendons; blood was hitting the wall of the silky flesh shell. I leaned on my elbow. Dawn, sweetness of the dawn? A silent storm was burning the cloudless horizon. A flash of lightning, the first ray of blue sunshine, flashed across the room and broke into sharp reflections; there was a crossfire of sparks, from the mirror, from the door handles, from the nickel-plated pipes; the light scattered, threw itself on every smooth surface and seemed to want to conquer a larger space, to burst the room. I looked at Harey; the pupils of her grey eyes had contracted. She asked in a dull voice: "Is the night over yet? - The night never lasts long here. - What about us? - What about us? - How long will we stay here? Coming from her, the question was not lacking in comical flavour; but when I spoke, my voice revealed no trace of mirth: - Quite a long time, probably. You don't want to stay? She did not blink. She was looking at me intently. Did she blink now? I wasn't sure. She pulled back the blanket and I saw the little pink triangle on her arm. - Why are you looking at me like that? - Because you're beautiful.

She smiled, without malice; she was discreetly thanking me for my compliment. - Really? It's as if... it's as if... - What? - As if you were doubting something. - What an idea! - As if you were suspicious of me, as if I had hidden something from you... - Nonsense! - The way you deny it, I can see I'm not wrong. The light was becoming blinding. With my hand in my visor, I looked for my glasses. They were on the table. I knelt down, stretched out my arm and put on the black glasses. When I lay down beside her, Harey smiled: "What about me? I suddenly realised: - Glasses? I got up and started to rummage around; I opened drawers; I moved books, instruments... I found two pairs of glasses, which I gave to Harey. I found two pairs of glasses, which I gave to Harey. She tried them on, one pair after the other. The glasses were too big; they fell to the middle of her nose. The shutters creaked as they slid past the window. And it was night again. I groped to help Harey remove his glasses and put them under the bed. She asked, "What are we doing? - We sleep at night! - Kris... - What? - Do you want a compress on your forehead? - No, thank you. Thank you... my darling. I don't know why I added those two words. In the darkness I grasped her graceful shoulders, felt them quiver, and felt sure that I was holding Harey in my arms. Or rather, I suddenly realised that she was not trying to fool me; it was I who was fooling her - for she sincerely believed that she was Harey.

Then I dozed off several times, and each time I was startled out of my sleep. Panting, exhausted, I held on to her; my heart was slowly calming. With her fingertips, carefully, she touched my cheeks, my forehead, to check that I had no fever. It was Harey. The only one, the real Harey. Something changed in me; I stopped struggling and almost immediately fell asleep. A pleasant cool sensation woke me up. My face was covered with a damp cloth, which I easily removed, and I saw Harey bending over me. She smiled at me. With both hands she was pressing a piece of gauze, which was dripping into a porcelain basin; beside the basin was a bottle of healing lotion. - What a sleep!" she said, applying the compress she had just prepared to my temple. - Does it hurt? - No. I wrinkled my forehead. I wrinkled my forehead; the skin was supple again. Harey was sitting on the edge of the bed, her black hair thrown back over the collar of a bathrobe, a man's dressing gown, with orange and white stripes, whose sleeves she had rolled up to the elbow. I was terribly hungry; it had been at least twenty hours since my last meal. When Harey had finished her nursing, I stood up and looked at two dresses draped over the back of an armchair - two identical white dresses, each with a row of red buttons. I had torn one of the dresses myself, to help Harey leave it. And Harey had come back last night wearing the second dress! I had to undo the seam with scissors," she said. I think the zip got stuck. The sight of the two identical dresses was beyond anything I had ever seen before. Harey was busy tidying up the little pharmacy. I turned away and bit my fist. Continuing to stare at the two dresses - or rather, the one duplicate dress - I walked away towards

the door. The water was running noisily from the tap. I opened the door, slipped out of the room, and carefully closed the panel. I could hear the murmur of water, the clink of bottles; suddenly all noise ceased. I waited with clenched jaws; the door panel reflected one of the luminous tubes which surrounded the ceiling of the rotunda. I held the handle, without much conviction that I could keep it up. A sudden jolt almost tore it from my hand; but the door did not open; it vibrated and shook from top to bottom. Stunned, I let go of the handle and stepped back. The plastic panel was hollowing out, as if an unseen figure beside me had tried to break down the door and enter the room! The steel frame of the panel became more and more arched and the enamel was crumbling. Suddenly I realised that instead of pushing the door open, Harey was trying to open it by pulling it towards himself. The reflection of the light tube bent in the distorting mirror of the white panel; a loud crack sounded and the panel, stretched to the limit, split open. Simultaneously, the handle disappeared, torn from its mount. Bloody hands passed through the crack, came forward leaving red marks on the milky varnish, and the door broke into two pieces hanging at an angle from their hinges. A pale face appeared; a haggard creature in an orange and white bathrobe rushed to my chest, sobbing. I wanted to flee, too late and against all hope; but I was unable to move. Harey was breathing convulsively; her dishevelled head was pounding on my shoulder. When I could reach out to restrain her, Harey collapsed. Avoiding the broken panel, I carried her into the room and laid her on the bed. Her skinned fingertips had broken nails. When she turned her hand over, I saw the bones of her palm protruding. I looked at her face; the expressionless eyes did not see me. - Harey! She answered with an inarticulate grunt. I put a finger to her eye; the lid closed.


I moved towards the pharmacy. The bed creaked; I turned around; Harey was sitting up and looking down at her bloody hands in horror. - Kris," she moaned, "I... I... what happened to me? I answered curtly, "You hurt yourself when you broke down the door. My lips itched oddly, especially my lower lip, which I clamped between my teeth. Harey looked for a moment at the pieces of the plastic panel hanging from the steel frame, then looked at me again. She tried to hide the terror that had overtaken her, but I could see that her chin was trembling. I cut up some gauze squares, took a jar of antiseptic powder and returned to the bed. The glass jar slipped out of my hand and broke, but I didn't need it anymore. I lifted Harey's hand. The fingernails, still surrounded by a trickle of curdled blood, had grown back. A pink scar ran down the palm, and the scar was fading, fading fast. I sat down, caressed his face, and tried to smile - without much success. - Why did you do this, Harey? - Was it me? With her eyes she pointed to the door. - Yes... Don't you remember? - No... I mean, I realised you were gone, I got very scared, and... - And what? - I looked for you, I thought you might be in the bathroom... Only then did I notice that the sliding wardrobe, hiding the entrance to the bathroom, had been pushed back. - Then? - I ran to the door. - Then? - I forgot... something must have happened... - What?

- I don't know. - What do you remember later? - I was sitting here on the bed. - Don't you remember me carrying you here? The corner of her lips drooped, her face worried, she hesitated: "It seems to me... it's possible... I don't know. She swung her legs over the edge of the bed, stood up and went to the broken door. - Kris! Coming up behind her, I grabbed her shoulders; she was shaking. She suddenly turned and whispered: "Kris, Kris..." "Calm down! - Kris, if it's me... Kris, am I epileptic? Epilepsy - goodness gracious! She definitely had some funny questions. - What an idea, my dear! We left the room just as the window shutter creaked up and the blue sun was sinking into the ocean. I led Harey to the small kitchen on the other side of the rotunda. Together we raided the cupboards and fridges. I soon found that Harey was not much better at cooking or opening cans than I was. I devoured the contents of two cans and drank countless cups of coffee. Harey also ate, as children sometimes do when they are not hungry and do not want to displease their parents; or rather, she did not force herself to eat; she took in the food automatically, with indifference. After the meal we went to the operating room, adjacent to the radio booth; I had my plan. I told Harey that I wanted to do a medical examination - just to check his general condition - and I put him in a mechanical chair. I removed a syringe and needles from the steriliser. I knew where everything was; the instructors had left no stone unturned during the training course in

inside the model of the Station. Harey held out his fingers; I took a drop of blood. I spread the blood on a glass plate and placed it on the bottom of the Exhauster; then I put the plate in a vacuum tank and rained down a shower of silver ions. I felt better; the gestures of familiar work had a calming effect. Lying on the cushions of the mechanical chair, Harey gazed at the equipment in the operating theatre. The hum of the telephone filled the silence; I lifted the receiver: - Kelvin. I watched Harey. She remained unmoved; she seemed exhausted by her recent adventure. I heard a sigh of relief: - Finally! It was Snaut. I waited with the earpiece pressed to my ear. - You have a 'visit', don't you? - Yes. - Are you busy? - Yes. - A little check-up, eh? - Do you mind? Did you want to play a game of chess? - Don't get upset, Kelvin! Sartorius wants to meet you, he wants the three of us to meet. Surprised, I replied: - Very kind of him! But... - I paused, then continued: "Is he alone? - I interrupted, then resumed: "Is he alone?" "No." "I misspoke. I misspoke. He would like to talk with us. We'll connect the three video telephones to the same line; the image transmission lenses will be blocked. - Ah! Why didn't he call me himself? Am I intimidating him? - Possibly," Snaut grumbled. What's up? - A conference... in an hour, will that do? - That's fine. I could see him on the screen - only the face, no bigger than my fist. For a moment he looked at me intently;

I could hear the crackle of the electric current. Then Sna ut spoke, with some hesitation: - How are you getting on? - Not too bad. How about you? - A bit worse than you, I suppose... Could I... - Would you like to come to my place? I looked over my shoulder at Harey. She was lying cross-legged, her head tilted forward, her face sullen as she played mechanically with the little chrome ball that ended a chain attached to the arm of the chair. Snaut's voice rang out: "Leave it alone, you hear? I'm telling you to leave it alone! I could see his profile on the screen; I couldn't hear anything - he had covered the microphone with his hand - but his lips were moving. - No, I can't come," he said quickly. Maybe later. I'll call you in an hour anyway. The screen went blank; I hung up the receiver. - Who was that?" asked Harey, without showing any curiosity. - Snaut, a cyberneticist... you don't know him. - How much longer is this going to take? - Are you bored? I put the first plate of the series in the neutrinic microscope case and, one after the other, I pressed the different coloured switches; the magnetic fields rumbled dully. - There are not many distractions here, and if my modest company is not enough for you... I spoke absentmindedly, prolonging the intervals between words. I drew the big black helmet that flared around the microscope to me and pressed my forehead against the elastic foam of the visor. I heard Harey's voice, but I did not understand what it said. My gaze looked out over a huge desert flooded with silver light, dotted with rounded rocky patches - red globules - that quivered and shook behind a veil of mist. I put the

I brought the telescope into focus and looked deeper into the fiery landscape. Without taking my eyes off the visor, I turned the orientation crank; when a sliver of rock, an isolated globule, was at the crossroads of the black threads, I enlarged the image. The lens had apparently encountered a deformed erythrocyte, collapsed in the middle, and its jagged edges cast sharp black shadows into the depths of a circular crater. The crater, bristling with silver ion deposits, escaped the microscope's field of vision. The nebulous contours of atrophied and distorted albumin chains appeared within an opalescent liquid. A coil of albumin folded back at the crossroads of the black threads of the lens; slowly, progressively, I operated the magnification lever. Any moment now I should have reached the end of this exploration of the abyss; the shadow of a molecule occupied the whole space; then the image became blurred... Nothing, however, showed itself. I should have seen the vibrating cloud of atoms - I saw nothing. The screen glowed immaculately. I pushed the lever all the way in. The irritated humming grew louder; I still could see nothing. An alarm signal sounded and repeated itself: the circuit was overloaded. One last time I looked out over the silvery desert and cut the power. I looked at Harey. She gave a yawn, which she deftly changed into a smile. She asked: "Am I in good health? - Excellent. You're doing very well, as well as can be expected. I continued to look at her and again felt a bug running through my lower lip. What exactly had happened? What did it mean? Was this body, weak and fragile in appearance - indestructible in reality - finally made of nothing? I banged my fist against the cylinder of the microscope. A defect in the apparatus? A bad concentration of magnetic fields? No, I knew that the device was working perfectly. I had gone through all the levels - the cells, the albumin conglomerates, the molecules - and everything was similar to what I had already observed


on thousands of preparations. But the last step into the material had led me nowhere. I made a ligature in Harvey; I took the blood from a median vein and transferred it to a graduated glass vessel. I then divided it between several test tubes and began the analysis. This work required more time than I had expected; I was a little out of practice. The reactions were normal, all the reactions... I dropped a drop of frozen acid on a coral bead. Smoke. The blood turned grey and was covered with a layer of dirty foam. Decay, decomposition, further, further! I turned away to take a second test tube; when my eye returned to the experiment in progress, I almost dropped the thin glass tube. Beneath the layer of dirty scum, a dark coral was growing. The blood, destroyed by the acid, was being recreated. It was absurd, impossible! - Kris! - I could hear my name, from a great distance. - Kris, the phone! - What? Oh, yes, thank you. Ah, yes, thank you. The phone had been ringing for a long time; I only realised it at that moment. I lifted the receiver: - Kelvin. - Snaut. All three of us are connected to the same line. Sartorius's high-pitched voice rang through the receiver: - Greetings, Dr Kelvin! - The cautious, deceptively confident voice of the speaker who has ventured onto a crumbling platform. I replied: - Greetings, Dr. Sartorius! I felt like laughing, but I didn't know if I could afford to give in to a mirth whose causes remained unclear. After all, who was there to laugh at? I had a test-tube of blood in my hand. I shook it. The blood had clotted. Perhaps, a few moments earlier, I had been the victim of an illusion? Perhaps I had been mistaken?

- I wanted to tell you, dear colleagues, about some questions concerning... ghosts. I heard Sartorius and yet my mind refused to take in his words; I looked at the clotted blood at the bottom of the test tube and fought against the voice that tried to force my attention. - Let's call them F-creations," Snaut said quickly. - Ah, yes, very good. A vertical line, barely perceptible in the middle of the screen, indicated that I was connected to two channels; separated by this line, I should have seen two images - Snaut and Sartorius. But the screen, framed by a bright border, remained dark. Both of my interlocutors had covered the lens of their cameras. - Each of us had carried out various experiments. - Always the same caution in the nasal voice. A silence. - I suggest that we first exchange the knowledge we have acquired," continued Sartorius. Then I will venture to communicate the conclusions I have reached personally. I suddenly felt Harey looking at me. I put my hand on the table and rolled the test tube under the racks of utensils. Then I perched myself on top of a high stool, which I had pulled up with my foot. I was about to recuse myself, when, to my own astonishment, I heard myself reply: "Fine. A little chat? I didn't do much, but I can talk about it. A histological preparation and some reactions. Microreactions. I have the impression that... - I didn't know what to say. Suddenly, a valve opened and I resumed: Everything is normal, but it's a camouflage. A mask. In a certain sense, it's a super copy, a reproduction superior to the original. Let me explain: whereas in humans there is a fundamental limit - a term to structural divisibility - here the boundaries are pushed back. We are dealing with an infra-atomic framework! - Just a moment, just a moment! Could you elaborate on this?" asked Sartorius.

Snaut said nothing. Was that the echo of his hurried breathing that I heard? Harey was looking at me again. I realised that in my excitement I had almost shouted the last words. Calmed, I settled back on my uncomfortable perch and closed my eyes. How can I be more precise? - The atom is the ultimate building block of our body. I suppose that F-creations are made up of units smaller than ordinary atoms, much smaller. - Mesons," insinuated Sartorius. He was not at all surprised. - No, not mesons... I would have seen them. I would have seen them. The power of my device down here is a tenth to a twentieth of an angstrom, isn't it? But you can't see anything, nothing at all. So they are not mesons. They are neutrinos. - How do you make this assumption? Neutrino conglomerates are not stable... - I don't know. I'm not a physicist. Perhaps a magnetic field can stabilise them. I don't know the question. In any case, if my observations are correct, the edifice is made up of particles ten thousand times smaller than atoms. Wait, I haven't finished! If albumin molecules and cells were made up directly from these 'micro-atoms', they would have to be proportionately smaller. So would the globules, and the ferments, everything. But the dimensions are those of the structures of atoms. Therefore, albumin, cell, cell nucleus, everything is a mask! The real structure, which controls the functioning of the "visitor", remains hidden deeper. - Kelvin! Snaut had just stifled a scream. I paused in horror. I had said 'visitor'. Harey had not heard me. Besides, she wouldn't have understood. She was looking out of the window with her head in her hand, and the purple dawn was around her delicate profile. My distant interlocutors were silent; I could hear them breathing.

- There's something to remember in this," muttered Snaut. - Yes," remarked Sartorius, "but one thing stops us: the hypothetical Kelvin particles do not constitute the structure of the ocean. The ocean is a structure of atoms. I replied: - It may be able to produce neutrinos... I suddenly lost interest in what they were saying. The conversation was pointless - and not even funny. - Kelvin's hypothesis would explain this extraordinary resistance and the speed of regeneration, Snaut grumbled. Moreover, they probably carry an energy source inside them; they don't need to eat... - I demand the floor," cut in Sartorius. - The horrifying chairman of the debate was holding fast to the role he had assigned himself. - I would like to raise the question of the motivation for the appearance of F-creations. I would introduce the question in the following way: what are F-creations? They are not autonomous individuals, nor copies of determined individuals. They are merely materialized projections of the contents of our brain, on the theme of a given individual. The accuracy of this definition struck me; Sartorius was not sympathetic, but he was not stupid either. I took part in the conversation again: - I think you are right. I think you are right. Your definition would explain why this per... creation appeared, rather than that other one. Materialization originates in the most durable imprints of memory, particularly differentiated imprints. No single imprint, however, can be completely isolated; in the course of 'reproduction', fragments of contiguous imprints have been absorbed. Consequently, the newcomer sometimes reveals more extensive knowledge than that of the authentic individual whose copy he is... - Kelvin!" shouted Snaut again. Only Snaut reacted to my vocabulary deviations. Sartorius didn't seem to mind. Did this mean that Sartorius' 'visitor' was less perceptive by nature than the

"Snaut's 'visitor'? For a second I imagined the learned Dr Sartorius flanked by a stunted moron. - Indeed, that fits with our observations," said Sartorius. Now let's consider the motivation for the appearance! It is quite natural to assume, in the first place, that we are the object of an experiment. If I examine this thesis, the experiment seems to me to be poorly conducted. When we conduct an experiment, we take advantage of the results obtained and, above all, we carefully record the failures of our experimental system. As a result, we subsequently introduce changes to our way of doing things. In this case, however, no changes are made. The F-creations reappear as they were, without any correction... as helpless as before, every time we try to... get rid of them... I decided: - Well, return fire without a correction device, as Dr Snaut would say. Conclusions? - Simply that the thesis of the experiment does not sit well with this... this implausible mess. The ocean is... precise. The double-level structure of the F-creations testifies to this precision. Within certain limits, the F-creations behave in the same way as the real... the... He couldn't get out of it! - The originals," Snaut gasped. - Yes, the originals. But when the situation no longer corresponds to the normal faculties of the... er... original, the F-creation undergoes a sort of 'disconnection of consciousness', immediately followed by different, inhuman manifestations... - That's right, I said, and we can have fun cataloguing the behaviour of... these creations - a perfectly fruitless occupation! - I'm not sure," protested Sartorius. - I suddenly understood why he irritated me so much: he didn't talk, he

He wasn't talking, he was talking, as if he had been sitting in a session of the Institute. Apparently he could not express himself otherwise. - There is a question of individuality here," he continued, "which I am sure the ocean has no idea about. I believe that the... er... delicate aspect, the shocking aspect of our present condition, escapes his comprehension completely. - You think his actions are not premeditated? I had been somewhat taken aback by Sartorius's point of view; on reflection, I recognised that it was difficult to exclude it. - No, unlike our colleague Snaut, I do not believe in any perfidy, any malice, any cruel intention... Snaut raised his voice: - I do not lend him human feelings, but I try to explain to myself these continual returns! With a secret desire to annoy Sartorius, I said: "Perhaps they are connected to a device that goes round and round like a record. - Please, dear colleagues, let's not spread ourselves too thin. I have not finished. Under normal circumstances, I would have considered it premature to present a report, even a provisional one, on the state of my work; in view of the particular situation, I believe I can speak. I have the impression - an impression, I would add - that Dr Kelvin's hypothesis is not without merit. I am referring to the hypothesis of a neutrino structure... Our knowledge in this area is purely theoretical; we did not know that there was a possibility of stabilising such structures. We now have a clearly defined way out. The means of neutralising the magnetic field that stabilises the structure... For some time I had been noticing light rays on the screen; a large slit lit up the left half of the receiver from top to bottom and I saw a pink object moving slowly. The shutter slipped again and flew off. Sartorius gave a heart-rending cry: "Go away! Go away! I saw Sartorius's hands and forearms, protected by large laboratory sleeves, struggle; a golden disc suddenly shone, and then everything faded away. Only then,

I realised that the yellow disc was a straw hat... I took a deep breath: "Snaut? A tired voice answered: - Yes, Kelvin... - As I heard it, I realised that I liked him, and that I would rather not know who was keeping him company. - That's enough for now, isn't it? - I think so. - Before he had hung up, I added hastily: "Listen, if you can, come and see me, in the operating room or in my cabin, will you? - Okay, but I don't know when. This was the end of the conference.
