At 7pm ship time, I walked past those standing around the well, down the metal rungs and into the bunker. There was just enough room to put your elbows up. After screwing the end into the cable protruding from the wall, the suit inflated and from then on I could not make the slightest movement. I stood - or rather hung - in the air bed, fused into one with the metal shell. Looking up, I saw through the curved glass of the well&#39;s walls, and saw Moddard&#39;s face above it. It disappeared immediately and darkness fell as a heavy protective cone was placed overhead. I heard the repeated whistling of electric motors tightening the screws eight times. Then - the hiss of air being admitted to the shock absorbers. His eyes were getting used to the darkness. I&#39;ve already seen the celadon outline of the only gauge. - Ready, Kelvin? echoed through the headphones. &quot;Ready, Moddard,&quot; I replied. - Don&#39;t worry about anything. The station will pick you up, he said. - Happy journey! Before I could answer, something creaked overhead, and the pod shuddered. I tensed my muscles instinctively, but nothing else happened. - When does it start? I asked and heard a murmur, as if grains of the finest sand were falling on the membrane. - You&#39;re on your way, Kelvin. Keep well! answered Moddard&#39;s close voice. Before I could believe it, a wide gap opened in front of my face, through which I saw stars. I tried in vain to find the Alpha Aquarius towards which Prometheus flew away. The sky in these parts of the Galaxy told me nothing, I didn&#39;t know a single constellation, there was sparkling dust in the narrow window. I was waiting for the first star to fill up. I didn&#39;t notice it. They only began to weaken and disappear, dissolving in the ruddy background. I realized that I was already in the upper layers of the atmosphere. Stiff, wrapped in pneumatic cushions, I could only look straight ahead. There was still no horizon. I flew and flew, not feeling it at all, only slowly, insidiously, my body was covered with heat. Outside, there was a soft, shrill sound like metal on wet glass. Were it not for the numbers popping out of the indicator hole, I would not have realized the suddenness of my fall. The stars were gone. The peephole was filled with reddish brightness. I could hear my own heavy pulse, my face was burning, I could feel the cold breeze of the air conditioner on the back of my neck; I wished I had seen Prometheus - he must have been out of sight by now - when the automatic device opened the sight. The pod shuddered once and twice, vibrated unbearably, the shudder passed through all the insulating layers, through the airbags and penetrated deep into my body - the aquamarine outline of the indicator blurred. I watched it without fear. I didn&#39;t come that far to die on target. &quot;Solaris station,&quot; I said. - Solaris Station, Solaris Station! do something. I seem to be losing stability. Solaris Station, here you come. Reception. And again I missed an important moment of the planet&#39;s appearance. It spread out huge, flat; from the size of the streaks on its surface, I could tell that I was still far away. Or rather - high, because I have already passed the elusive border at which the distance from the celestial body becomes height. I was falling. I was still falling. I could feel it now, even with my eyes closed. I opened them immediately because I wanted to see as much as possible. I waited a few dozen seconds of silence and repeated the calls. And this time I got no answer. The crackles of lightning flashed through the headphones in salvos. Their background was a hum so deep and low as if it were the voice of the planet itself. The orange sky in the peephole turned white. His glass darkened; I instinctively shrunk as much as the pneumatic bandages would allow before, in the next second, I realized they were clouds. As if blown away, a shoal of them flew up. I glided on, sometimes in the sun, sometimes in the shadow, the container rotated along its vertical axis and a huge, swollen, sun disc flowed steadily in front of my face, appearing on the left and setting on the right. Suddenly, through the noise and crackling, a distant voice began to speak directly into the ear: - Solaris Station to the newcomer, Solaris Station to the newcomer. Everything&#39;s all right. You come under the control of the Station. Solaris station to newcomer, prepare for zero time landing, I repeat, prepare for zero time landing, attention, I&#39;m starting. Two hundred and fifty, two hundred and forty-nine, two hundred and forty-eight ... The individual words were separated by fractional meows, showing that he was not speaking a human. It was strange to say the least. Normally, the living rushes to the airport when someone new arrives, and straight from Earth at that. But I could think no more of it, for the great circle which the sun had made around me reared up with the plain toward which I was flying; this tilt was followed by another, in the opposite direction; I swung like the weight of a giant pendulum, and fighting my vertigo, I saw in the rising sky of the planet, striped with dirty lilac and blackish streaks, a tiny checkerboard of white and green dots - the landmark of the Station. At the same time something snapped off the top of the canister - the long necklace of an annular parachute, which whirred violently; there was something indescribably earthly about the sound - the first sound of real wind after so many months. Everything started happening very quickly. All I knew was that I was falling. Now I saw it. The green and white chessboard grew rapidly, I could see that it was painted on the elongated, whale-like, silvery body, with radar sensor needles sticking out at the sides, with rows of darker window openings, that this metal colossus did not rest on the surface of the planet, but hung above it , dragging his shadow across the inky black background, an elliptical patch of darkness still deeper. At the same time I saw the violet furrows of the ocean revealing a faint movement, then the clouds moved high, edged in dazzling crimson, the sky between them became distant and flat, dark orange, and everything blurred: I went into a corkscrew. Before I could speak, a brief blow brought the container back to its upright position, and through the sight glass, the ocean shone with mercurial light, undulating to the smoky horizon; the snarling lines and rings of the parachute suddenly detached and flew over the waves, carried by the wind, and the canister swung softly, in that special, slow motion it usually has in an artificial force field, and slid down. The last thing I saw were lattice aircraft catapults and two mirrors of lattice radio telescopes, probably several stories high. Something immobilized the container with the shrill sound of steel striking steel against steel, something opened beneath me, and with a long, puffing sigh, the metal shell in which I was sitting upright ended its one hundred and eighty-kilometre journey. - Solaris station. Zero and Zero. Landing done. It&#39;s over - I heard the dead voice of the control device. With both hands (I felt a vague pressure on my chest, and my insides felt like an unpleasant heaviness) I gripped the hilts in front of my shoulders and disconnected the contacts. The green word EARTH flashed and the wall of the container swung open; the pneumatic bed pushed me slightly in the back, so that I had to take a step forward to keep from falling. With a soft hiss, like a resigned sigh, the air left the coils of the suit. I was free. I was standing under a nave-high, silver funnel. Bunches of colored pipes ran down the walls, disappearing into round manholes. I turned around. Ventilation shafts roared, sucking in the remnants of the planet&#39;s poisonous atmosphere that had intruded upon landing. The container&#39;s cigar, empty as a bursting cocoon, stood on a bowl sunk into a steel hill. Its outer sheets had charred a dirty brown. I went down a small ramp. Then a layer of rough plastic was welded onto the metal. It had worn down to bare steel where rocket lift carts usually rolled. Suddenly, the fan compressors fell silent, and there was complete silence. I looked around a bit helplessly, expecting a human to appear, but still no one was coming. Only the neon arrow showed, blazing, the silent conveyor belt. I entered his plane. The ceiling of the hall flowed down in a beautiful parabolic line, turning into a corridor pipe. Heaps of compressed-gas cylinders, canisters, annular parachutes, crates, piled up in its alcoves, all piled up in a messy mess. This also made me wonder. The conveyor ended at the circular extension of the corridor. There was even more disorder here. A puddle of oily liquid spread beneath the heap of tin bubbles. An unpleasant, strong odor filled the air. There were footprints in different directions, clearly imprinted in the sticky liquid. Rolls of white telegraph tapes, torn papers and rubbish lay among the tins, as if swept out of the cabins. Again the green indicator flashed, directing me to the middle door. Behind them ran a corridor so narrow that two men could barely pass in it. The lighting was provided by the upper windows, pointed at the sky, with lenticular glasses. Another door, painted green and white checkerboard. They were repealed. I went inside. The semi-spherical cabin had one large panorama window; the mist-covered sky was burning in it. Below, the blackish mounds of waves moved noiselessly. The walls were full of open cupboards. They were filled with instruments, books, glasses with dried sediment, dusty thermoses. There were five or six mechanical, rolling tables on the dirty floor, with several armchairs between them, sagging because they had been deflated. Only one was bloated, with its back tilted back. There sat a small, skinny man with a sunburnt face. The skin peeled off his nose and cheekbones in patches. I knew him. It was Snaut, Gibarian&#39;s second-in-command, the cyberneticist. In his time, he published some not-so-original articles in the solaristic almanac. I&#39;ve never seen him before. He was wearing a net shirt through which a single gray hair of a flat chest poked out through the eyelets, and once-white linen trousers stained at the knees and with many pockets like a fitter&#39;s. In his hand was a plastic pear, the kind you drink out of on ships without artificial gravity. He looked at me as if struck by a blinding light. A pear dropped from his relaxed fingers and bounced up and down like a balloon. Some clear liquid spilled out of it. Slowly all the blood drained from his face. I was too surprised to speak, and the silent scene continued until his fear communicated to me in some incomprehensible way. I took a step. He shrunk in the chair. &quot;Snaut...&quot; I whispered. He trembled as if struck. Looking at me with indescribable disgust, he croaked: - I don&#39;t know you, I don&#39;t know you, what do you want...? The spilled liquid evaporated quickly. I smelled alcohol. drank? He was drunk? But why was he so afraid? I was still in the middle of the cabin. My knees were soft and my ears were stuffed with cotton wool. I took the pressure of the floor under my feet as something not yet completely certain. The ocean moved steadily through the curved glass of the window. Snaut kept his bloodshot eyes on me. The fear left his face, but the unspeakable disgust remained. - What&#39;s wrong...? I asked in a low voice. - Are you sick? &quot;You care...&quot; he said dully. - I see. You&#39;ll care, won&#39;t you? But why about me? I do not know you. - Where is Gibarian? I asked. He lost his breath for a second, his eyes glassy again, something flickered and went out. - Gi... giba... - he stammered - no! no!!! He trembled with a soundless, idiotic chuckle, which suddenly stopped. - You came to Gibarian...? he said almost calmly. - To Gibarian? What do you want to do with it? He looked at me as if I had suddenly ceased to be dangerous to him; there was something hatefully offensive in his words, and even more so in their tone. &quot;What are you talking about?&quot; I stammered, stunned. - Where is he? He was stunned. - You do not know...? He&#39;s drunk, I thought. Drunk to unconsciousness. I was filled with growing anger. Actually, I should have left, but my patience ran out. - Come to your senses! I boomed. &quot;How do I know where he is if I just arrived!&quot; What&#39;s wrong with you, Snaut!!! His jaw dropped. He lost his breath again for a moment, but somehow, a sudden gleam appeared in his eyes. With trembling hands, he gripped the armrests of the chair and struggled to his feet, his joints creaking. - What? he said almost sober. - Did you come? Where did you come from? &quot;From Earth,&quot; I replied furiously. - Have you heard of her? Looks like not! - From Zie... heavens... are you - Kelvin?! - Yes. What are you looking at? What&#39;s weird about that? &quot;Nothing,&quot; he said, blinking rapidly. - Nothing. He rubbed his forehead. - Kelvin, I&#39;m sorry, it&#39;s nothing, you know, just a surprise. I did not expect. - How did you not expect it? After all, you got the message months ago, and Mod-dard telegraphed today from the Pro-metheus... - Yes. Yes... probably, just see, there is a certain... chaos here. &quot;Yes,&quot; I replied dryly. - It&#39;s hard not to see it. Snaut walked around me as if checking the appearance of my suit, the most ordinary in the world, with a harness of wires and cables across the chest. He coughed several times. He touched his bony nose. - Would you like to take a bath...? It will help you choose - the blue door on the opposite side. - Thank you. I know the layout of the station. - Maybe you&#39;re hungry...? - No. Where&#39;s Gibarian? He walked over to the window as if he hadn&#39;t heard my question. Turned back with the kilns, he looked much older. His close-cropped hair was gray, and the nape of his neck, sunburnt, was lined with cuts as deep as cuts. Outside the window, great crests of waves glistened, rising and falling as slowly as if the ocean was solidifying. Looking there, the Station seemed to move slightly sideways, as if sliding off an invisible base. Then she returned to balance and with the same lazy tilt she walked in the other direction. But that was probably an illusion. Patches of blood-colored slime foam gathered in the hollows between the waves. For an instant, I felt a sickening pressure in my pit. The dry order of the Prometheus decks seemed to me something precious, irretrievably lost. &quot;Listen...&quot; Snaut said suddenly, &quot;only me for the moment...&quot; He turned around. He rubbed his hands nervously. &quot;You&#39;ll have to be content with my company.&quot; See you. Call me Rat. You only know me from photos, but that&#39;s okay, that&#39;s what everyone says. I&#39;m afraid there&#39;s no way around that. After all, when you have parents with such cosmic aspirations as me, only the Rat starts to sound something like that ... - Where is Gibarian? I asked stubbornly again. He blinked. - I&#39;m sorry to receive you like this. It&#39;s... not just my fault. I completely forgot, there was a lot going on here, you know... &quot;Ah, all right,&quot; I said. - Let&#39;s leave it. So what about Gibarian? He&#39;s not at the station? flew somewhere? &quot;No,&quot; he replied. He stared at the corner lined with spools of cable. - He didn&#39;t fly anywhere. And it won&#39;t. Because of this... among other things... - What? I asked. My ears were still clogged and I thought I couldn&#39;t hear better. - What&#39;s that supposed to mean? Where is he? &quot;You already know,&quot; he said in a completely different tone. He stared into my eyes coldly, making me shiver. He may have been drunk, but he knew what he was talking about. - It didn&#39;t...? - Has become. - Accident? He nodded. He not only nodded, but also approved of my reaction. - When? - This morning at dawn. Strange thing, I didn&#39;t feel a jolt. The whole brief exchange of monosyllabic questions and answers rather reassured me with its matter-of-factness. I thought I understood his previously incomprehensible behavior. - How? &quot;Get changed, put your things in order, and come back here in... in, say, an hour.&quot; I hesitated a moment. - Okay. &quot;Wait,&quot; he said as I turned to the door. He was looking at me in a special way. I could see that what he wanted to say didn&#39;t come out of his mouth. - There were three of us and now, with you, there are three again. Do you know Sartorius? - Like you, from the photo. &quot;He&#39;s in the lab upstairs, and I don&#39;t think he&#39;ll be out until nightfall, but...you&#39;ll recognize him anyway.&quot; If you saw someone else, you know, not me or Sartorius, you understand, then... - So what? I didn&#39;t know if I was dreaming. Against the backdrop of black waves glistening bloody in the low sun, he sat in his chair with his head lowered as before and stared sideways at the spools of coiled cable. - It&#39;s... don&#39;t do anything. - Who can I see? ghost?! I burst out. - I see. You think I&#39;m crazy. No. I&#39;m not crazy. I can&#39;t tell you otherwise... for now. Anyway, maybe... nothing will happen. Anyway, remember. I warned you. - From what!? What are you talking about? &quot;Take control of yourself,&quot; he said stubbornly. - Act like... be prepared for anything. It&#39;s impossible, I know. Try it anyway. That&#39;s the only advice. I don&#39;t know another. - But WHAT will I see!!! I almost shouted. I barely refrained from grabbing him by the shoulders and giving him a good shake as he sat staring into the corner, his sunburned face tired and struggling to force out single words. - I do not know. In a way, it&#39;s up to you. - Hallucinations? - No. It is - real. No... attack. Remember. - What are you talking about?! I replied in a non-my voice. - We&#39;re not on Earth. - Polytheria? But they are not human at all! I called. I didn&#39;t know what to do to shake him out of this obsession from which he seemed to read the blood-curdling nonsense. &quot;That&#39;s why it&#39;s so scary,&quot; he said quietly. - Remember: be careful! - What happened to Gibarian? He did not answer. - What does Sartorius do? - Come back in an hour. I turned and left. As I opened the door, I looked at him again. He sat with his face in his hands, small, shrunken, in stained trousers. I noticed only now that there was caked blood on the knuckles of both hands.