Kris, is it because of this experiment? I cringed at her voice. I lay awake for hours, staring into the darkness, alone because I couldn&#39;t even hear her breathing, and in the tangled labyrinths of night thoughts, delirious, half-sense and thus taking on a new dimension and meaning, I forgot about her. - What... how do you know I&#39;m awake...? I asked. There was fear in my voice. &quot;After you breathe...&quot; she said softly, somewhat apologetically. - I didn&#39;t mean to disturb you... If you can&#39;t, don&#39;t say... - No, why. Yes, that&#39;s the experiment. you guessed it. - What do they expect from him? - They don&#39;t know themselves. something. anything. This isn&#39;t Operation Think, it&#39;s Operation Despair. Now all it takes is one man who has the courage to take responsibility for the decision, but this kind of courage most people consider mere cowardice, because it is a retreat, you think, a resignation, an escape unworthy of a man. As if it were worthy of a man to wade and get bogged down and drown in something he doesn&#39;t understand and never will. I paused, but before my ragged breath subsided, a new surge of anger burst out of my mouth. Even if we couldn&#39;t make contact, they said, by studying this plasma - all those crazy living cities that pop out of it every day to disappear - we&#39;d learn the mysteries of matter, as if they didn&#39;t know it was cheating, walking on library, written in an incomprehensible language, that you will only look at the colors of the spines ... And how! - Aren&#39;t there more planets like this? - Don&#39;t know. Maybe there are, we only know this one. Anyway, she&#39;s something extremely rare, unlike Earth. We, we are common, we are the grass of the universe, and we pride ourselves on our commonness, that it is so common, and we thought that everything could be contained in it. It was such a scheme that set off boldly and joyfully into the distance: other worlds! So what are these other worlds? We will master them or we will be mastered, there was nothing else in those wretched brains, ah, not worth it. Not worth it. I got up, groped for the first aid kit, a flat jar of sleeping pills. &quot;I&#39;m going to sleep, darling,&quot; I said, turning to the darkness where the fan was whirring high. - I have to sleep. Otherwise, I don&#39;t know... I sat on the bed. She touched my hand. I grabbed her, invisible, and held her still until sleep loosened the grip. In the morning, when I awoke fresh and rested, the experiment seemed to me something trivial, I did not understand how I could attach such importance to it. Also, the fact that Harey had to come with me to the lab didn&#39;t matter much to me. All her efforts were in vain after my absence from the room for a few minutes, so I gave up any further attempts she insisted on (even ready to be locked up somewhere) and advised her to pick up a book to read. I was more interested in what I would find in the laboratory than the procedure itself. Apart from quite significant gaps in the shelves and cabinets with analytical glass (moreover, some of the cabinets lacked glass, and the surface of one door was star-shaped cracked, as if a fight had recently taken place here, the traces of which were hastily but meticulously removed) there was no nothing special about the blue room. Snaut, bustling with the apparatus, behaved very correctly, took Harey&#39;s appearance as something quite ordinary, and gave her a slight bow from a distance; while he was wetting my temples and forehead with saline, Sartorius appeared. He entered through a small door leading to a darkroom. He was in a white cloak, with a black anti-radiation coat thrown over him that reached down to his ankles. Businesslike, brisk, he greeted me as if we were one of a hundred employees of a great earthly institute and had parted the day before. I noticed only now that his face was deadened by the contact lenses he wore under his eyelids instead of glasses. He stood with his arms crossed over his chest. watching Snaut wrap the electrodes around my head with a bandage that formed a kind of white cap. He glanced around the room several times, as if not noticing Harey at all, who, huddled, unhappy, sat on a small stool against the wall, pretending to read a book; as Snaut moved away from my chair, I moved my metal-and-wire-laden head to see him switch on the apparatus, but Sartorius suddenly raised his hand and spoke solemnly, &quot;Dr. Kelvin!&quot; I am asking for a moment of attention and concentration! I&#39;m not going to impose anything on you, because that wouldn&#39;t lead to the goal, but you must stop thinking about yourself, about me, about colleague Snaut, about any other people, to eliminate the randomness of individual individuals, and focus on the cause we represent here. Earth and Solaris, generations of researchers constituting a whole, although individual people have their beginning and end, our tenacity in striving to establish intellectual contact, the extent of the historical path traveled by humanity, the certainty of its extension in the future, readiness for all sacrifices and hardships, to give all personal feelings to our mission - these are a number of topics that should fill your consciousness as thoroughly as possible. Although the course of associations does not depend entirely on your will, the fact that you are here ensures the authenticity of the sequence I have presented. If you are not sure that you have completed the task, please say so and colleague Snaut will repeat the record. We&#39;ve got time... He said the last words with a pale, dry smile that didn&#39;t take away from his eyes an expression of piercing astonishment. I writhed internally from the steak of these so serious, so serious phrases, fortunately Snaut broke the prolonged silence. - Can you, Kris? he asked, leaning his elbow on the high electroencephalograph desk, in a casual and familiar pose, as if he was leaning on a chair. I was grateful to him for calling me by name. &quot;You can,&quot; I said, closing my eyes. The jitters that had emptied my mind as he finished attaching the electrodes and placed his fingers on the switch disappeared suddenly, and through my eyelashes I saw the pinkish glow of the control lights on the black plate of the apparatus. At the same time, the damp and unpleasant coolness of the metal electrodes, like cold coins around my head, disappeared. I was like a gray, unlit arena. This emptiness was assisted on all sides by a crowd of invisible spectators, amphitheatrically swelled around a silence in which ironic contempt for Sartorius and the Mission dissipated. The tension of internal observers, eager to play an impromptu role, was easing. hare? I thought the word tentatively, with nauseating anxiety, ready to withdraw it immediately. But my watchful, blind audience didn&#39;t protest. For a while I was all pure tenderness, sincere regret, ready for patient, long sacrifices. Harey filled me without features, without shapes, without a face, and suddenly through her impersonal, desperate tenderness breathing concept with all the seriousness of its professorial countenance I saw Giese, the father of solar studies and solarists, in the gray darkness. But it wasn&#39;t that muddy outburst I was thinking of, the fetid abyss that engulfed his gold glasses and dutifully brushed gray mustache, all I saw was the copperplate on the title page of the monograph, the densely hatched background the artist had framed his head that stood almost unsuspecting in a halo, so similar not in features but in honest, old-fashioned consideration to my father&#39;s face, and in the end I didn&#39;t know which one was looking at me. Neither of them had a grave, a thing so common and ordinary in our times that it did not arouse any particular emotion. The image was gone, and for one moment, I don&#39;t know how long, I forgot about the Station, about the experiment, about Harey, about the black ocean, about everything, filled with the instantaneous certainty that these two, no longer existing, infinitely small, in dried mud, twisted men, they faced everything that befell them, and the peace of this discovery was shattered by the shapeless crowd that surrounded the gray arena in silent anticipation of my defeat. With the double click of the switched-off apparatus, the artificial light burst into my eyes. I narrowed my eyes. Sartorius looked at me searchingly, still in the same pose, Snaut, with his back to him, bustling about the camera, deliberately as if shuffling clogs falling from his feet. - Do you think it worked, Dr. Kelvin? Sartorius suspended his nasal, repulsive voice. &quot;Yes,&quot; I said. - Are you sure? said Sartorius with a hint of surprise or even suspicion. - Yes. The certainty and brusque tone of my answer distracted him for a moment from his rigid seriousness. &quot;That&#39;s...good,&quot; he muttered, and looked around as if he didn&#39;t know what to do now. Snaut walked over to the chair and began to unwrap the bandages. I got up and walked around the room while Sartorius, who had disappeared into the darkroom, returned with the film, already developed and dried. There were quivering, whitish serrated lines stretching over a dozen yards of tape, like some kind of mold or cobweb, splayed across a black, slippery web of celluloid. I had nothing else to do, but I didn&#39;t leave. The other two inserted a film into the burnished modulator head, the end of which Sartorius watched again, frowning mistrustfully as if he was trying to decipher the meaning of those fluttering lines. The rest of the experiment was invisible. All I knew was what was going on when they were standing at the switchboards along the wall and activating the proper apparatus. The current woke with a faint bass hum in the embankment of coils under the armored floor, and then only the lights on the vertical glazed tubes of the gauges went down, indicating that the huge X-ray gun tube was lowering down the vertical shaft to come to rest in its open mouth. The lights then froze on the lowest bands of the scale, and Snaut began to increase the voltage until the pointers, or rather the white bands that replaced them, fanned half a turn to the right. The sound of the electricity was barely audible, nothing happened, the film drums were turning under the cover so that even that could not be seen, the meter ticking as silently as clockwork. Harey looked from her book to me, then to them. I went over to her. She looked questioningly. The experiment was now ending, and Sartorius walked slowly to the great conical head of the apparatus. - Are we going...? Harey asked with her mouth alone. I nodded. She got up. Without saying goodbye to anyone - it would seem too pointless to me - I walked past Sartorius. The tall windows of the upper corridor were filled with a sunset of singular beauty. It was not an ordinary, gloomy, swollen red, but all shades of lightly hazy pink, as if sprinkled with the smallest silver. The heavy, limply undulating blackness of the endless plain of the ocean seemed to respond to this gentle glow with a brown-violet drizzle of soft reflection. Only at the zenith the sky was still stubbornly red. I stopped suddenly in the middle of the lower corridor. I couldn&#39;t even think about the fact that we would be locked in a cabin open to the ocean again, like in a prison cell. &quot;Harey,&quot; I said, &quot;you know... I&#39;d look in the library... Do you mind...?&quot; &quot;Oh, I&#39;d love to, I&#39;ll find something to read,&quot; she replied with a little artificial animation. I felt that there had been an unfilled rift between us since yesterday and that I should show her some affection, but complete apathy overtook me. I don&#39;t know what would have to happen for me to shake it off. We went back down the corridor, then up the ramp to a small vestibule, there were three doors, flowers between them like in some cases behind crystal glass. The middle door leading to the library was covered on both sides with raised imitation leather; I always tried not to touch it when opening it. Inside, in the round, great hall, under the pale silver ceiling of stylized suns, it was a little cooler. I ran my hand along the spines of the set of Solarian classics and was about to take out the first volume of Giese, with that copper-engraved likeness on the paper-covered opening page, when I unexpectedly discovered Gravinsky&#39;s volume, unnoticed the previous time, in the size of an eight. I sat down in the padded chair. It was completely silent. A step behind me, Harey was leafing through a book, and I could hear the pages slipping lightly under her fingers. Gravinsky&#39;s Compendium, most commonly used as a mere &quot;car&quot; in college, was an alphabetical collection of Solarian hypotheses, ranging from Abiological to Degenerative. The compiler, who had never even seen Solaris, sifted through all the monographs, expedition protocols, snippets and temporary reports, he even studied quotations in the works of planetary scientists studying other globes, and gave a catalog that was a little frightening in terms of conciseness, because sometimes they turned into trivialities, having lost the subtle intricacy of thoughts that guided their birth, moreover, this whole, intended to be encyclopaedic, already presented rather of bizarre value, the volume was published twenty years ago, and in that time a mountain of new hypotheses had accumulated that could not be contained in a single book. scattered everywhere The richness of thought gave the impression that one of the hypotheses simply had to be right, that it was impossible for reality to be quite different, other than the myriad proposals hurled at it. Gravinsky preceded it with a preface, in which he divided almost sixty years of solar studies known before him into periods. In the first one - dating from the initial exploration of Solaris - no one actually consciously made hypotheses. It was then assumed, somehow intuitively, due to &quot;common sense&quot;, that the ocean is a dead, chemical conglomerate, a monstrous lump of jelly flowing around the globe, which results in strange creations thanks to its &quot;quasi-volcanic&quot; activity and the self-generated automatism of processes stabilizes the unstable orbit, as the pendulum maintains an unchanging plane of motion once given. It is true that three years later Magenon declared himself in favor of the animate nature of the &quot;gelatinous machine,&quot; but Gravinsky did not date the period of biological hypotheses until nine years later, when Magenon&#39;s previously isolated court began to gain more and more adherents. detailed theoretical models of the living ocean, supported by biomathematical analysis. the entire legacy of Giese was then subjected to crushing criticism: the first atlases, catalogues, stereophotographs of asymmetrias, hitherto considered impossible to study, were created, and the breakthrough came thanks to new, remotely controlled devices that were sent into the turbulent depths of the colossi threatening to explode at every second. Then it was on the fringe of the raging discussions that they started isolated, contemptuously suppressed mini-malist hypotheses claiming that even if one fails to make the notorious &quot;contact&quot; with the &quot;sentient monster&quot;, the study of ossifying mimoid cities and ballooning mountains that the ocean throws up to be reabsorbed they will probably bring valuable chemical, physico-chemical knowledge, new experiences in the field of construction of giant molecules, but no one even engaged in polemics with the proponents of such theses. It was, after all, the period in which the catalogs of typical metamorphoses, valid to this day, or Franck&#39;s bioplasmic theory of mimoids were created, which, although abandoned as false, remained a great model of intellectual momentum and logical construction. These thirty-odd years of &quot;Gravinsky&#39;s periods&quot; were naive youth, spontaneously optimistic romanticism, and finally - marked by the first skeptical voices - the mature age of solarism. - hypotheses being their late progeny, about the apsychic nature of the Solarian ocean. Any search for manifestations of conscious will, teleological processes, action, motivated by the internal needs of the ocean, was almost universally recognized as some kind of aberration of an entire generation of researchers. The journalistic passion for refuting their claims prepared the ground for sober oriented, focused on the diligent accumulation of facts, the investigations of the group of Holden, Eonides, Stoliwa; it was a time of rapid swelling and expansion of archives, microfilm files, expeditions, richly equipped with all possible cameras, automatic recorders, sensors, probes, such as What the Earth could provide. In some years, more than a thousand people were involved in the research at a time, but while the rate of accumulating material constantly accumulating was still increasing, the spirit animating the scientists was already starving, and the period of decline of this still optimistic phase of Solaria, which was difficult to delineate in time, was beginning exploration. It was characterized above all by great, courageous - sometimes theoretical imagination, sometimes negation - individuals such as Giese, Strobla or Sevada, who - the last of the great solarists - died in mysterious circumstances near the south pole of the planet, having done something that does not happen even for a novice. He guided his camera, hovering low over the ocean, in front of a hundred observers, into the swiftness that was clearly moving out of his way. There was talk of some sudden weakness, fainting, or failure of the rudders, but in fact it was, I believe, the first suicide, the first sudden, overt outburst of despair. Not the last one though. But Gravinsky&#39;s volume did not contain such data, I added dates, facts and details myself, looking at its yellowed, finely spotted pages. After that, there were no such pathetic attempts on one&#39;s own life, there were also no great individualities. Recruitment of researchers dedicated to a specific field of planetology is actually a phenomenon that has not been studied by anyone. People of great abilities and great strength of character are born with more or less constant frequency, only their choice is not the same. Their presence or absence in a given field of research may perhaps explain the perspectives it opens up. Differently evaluating the classics of solaristics, no one can deny their greatness, sometimes genius. The best mathematicians, physicists, greats in biophysics, information theory, electrophysiology were drawn to the silent Solarian giant for decades. Suddenly, the army of explorers was taken from year to year, as it were, from leaders. What remained was a grey, nameless crowd of patient collectors, compilers, creators of many original experiments, but there was a lack of mass expeditions, intended on a global scale, and bold, unifying hypotheses. Solaristics seemed to be falling apart and, as if in parallel with its descending flight, there were massively differing hypotheses about the degeneration, regression, and involution of the Solarian seas. From time to time a bolder, more interesting take appeared, but all of them judged, as it were, the ocean, considered the final product of development, which long ago, millennia ago, went through the period of the highest organization, and now, united only physically, disintegrated into a swarm of useless, senseless, agonal creations. So already monumental, centuries-long agony; that&#39;s how Solaris was seen, looking for signs of carcinogenesis in long-tails or mimoids, looking for signs of chaos and anarchy in the processes taking place in the liquid body, until this direction became an obsession, so that all the scientific literature of the next seven or eight years, although, of course, devoid of definitions expressing the feelings of its authors openly, is as if one heap of insults - revenge, taken by the lonely, leaderless, gray masses of solarists on the still equally indifferent object of strenuous research, ignoring their presence. I knew the Solarian classics not included in this set, probably wrongly, the original works of a dozen or so European psychologists who had so much in common with solaristics that over a long period of time they studied the reactions of public opinion, collecting the most mediocre statements, voices of non-professionals, and thus showed a surprisingly accurate the relationship of changes in this opinion with the processes that were simultaneously taking place within the scientific community. Also within the coordinating group of the Institute of Planetology, where it was decided on material support for research, changes were taking place, expressed in a continuous, though gradual, reduction of the budget of institutes and solaristic facilities, as well as subsidies for teams going to the planet. Voices about the need to reduce research were mixed with those who demanded the use of more active agents, but no one seemed to go further than the administrative director of the All-Earth Cosmological Institute, who insisted that the living ocean did not ignore people, but did not notice them, just as elephant - ants walking on its back, and in order to attract its attention and concentrate it on us, you need to use powerful stimuli and machines-giants worthy of the whole planet. The amusing detail was that, as the press wryly pointed out, such costly endeavors had been requested by the director of the Cosmology Institute, not the Planetary Institute that funded Solarian exploration, so it was generosity out of his own pocket. And then the cycle of hypotheses, refreshing the old ones, introducing insignificant changes, making them more precise or, on the contrary, ambiguous, began to change the so far clear, despite the extent, solaristics into an increasingly complicated labyrinth full of dead ends. In the atmosphere of universal indifference, stagnation, and discouragement, a second ocean of papers printed in vain seemed to accompany Solarian time. About two years before I joined Gibarian&#39;s studio as a graduate of the Institute, the Mett-Irving Foundation had been set up, offering high rewards to anyone who harnessed the energy of ocean glia for human needs. This has been tempted before, and more than one cargo of plasma jelly has carried spaceships to Earth. Methods of preserving it were also worked out long and patiently, using high or low temperatures, artificial micro-atmosphere and microclimate, similar to solaria, fixative irradiation, and finally thousands of chemical recipes, all in order to observe a more or less sluggish process of decomposition, too, of course. , like everything else, described many times with the greatest accuracy in all stages - self-digestion, maceration, primary liquefaction, i.e. early, and late, secondary. Samples taken from all efflorescences and plasma formations met a similar fate. Only the paths leading to the end were different, which was represented by an ash-light, metallic gleam, diluted by auto-fermentation. Its composition, ratio of elements and chemical formulas could be given by any solarist awakened from sleep. The total failure to keep alive - or even in a state of suspended vegetation, some kind of hibernation - of a small or large particle of the monster outside its planetary organism gave rise to the belief (developed by the school of Meunier and Proroch) that there is really only one mystery to be guessed, and when we will open it with a properly selected interpretation key, everything will be explained at once... The search for this key, this Solaris philosopher&#39;s stone, wasted time and energy by people who had nothing to do with science, and in the fourth decade of the existence of solaristics, the number of maniacs coming from outside the scientific community of those possessed people, with the fervor of beating their former predecessors, such as the &quot;perpetuum mobile&quot; or &quot;squaring the circle&quot; prophets, has reached the proportions of an epidemic, even disturbing some psychologists. However, this passion died out after a few years, and when I was preparing to travel to Solaris, it had long since left the newspaper columns and disappeared from the conversation, as well as the ocean issue. Putting down Gravinsky&#39;s volume, I came across, as the books were arranged alphabetically, a tiny Grattenstrom pamphlet, barely discernible between the thick spines, one of the more peculiar efflorescences of Solarian writing. It was a work turned - in the struggle for understanding the Extrahuman - against people themselves, against man, a kind of lampoon on our species, self-taught work furious in its mathematical aridity, which, after first publishing a number of extraordinary contributions to certain very detailed and rather marginal branches of the quantum in physics, in his main, although only a dozen or so pages long, most extraordinary work, he tried to show that even the most seemingly abstract, the most theoretical, mathematized achievements of science, in fact, moved only a step or two away from the prehistoric, gross-sensory, anthropomorphic understanding the world around us. Tracing in the formulas of the theory of relativity, the force field theorem, in parastatics, in the hypotheses of the only cosmic field traces of the body, everything that is a derivative and effect of the existence of our senses, the structure of our organism, the limitations and imperfections of human animal physiology, Grattenstrom came to the final conclusion that there can be no &quot;contact&quot; between man and a non-human, ahumanoid civilization. In this lampoon for the whole species, not a word was mentioned about the thinking ocean, but its presence, in the form of a contemptuously triumphant silence, was felt under every almost a sentence, at least that&#39;s how I felt when I first read Grattenstrom&#39;s pamphlet, which was a curiosity rather than a solarianum in the normal sense, and it was in the classical collection because it had been inserted by Gibarian himself, who had given it to me to read. With a strange, reverential feeling, I carefully slipped the thin one on even an unbound print between the books on the shelf. I touched the green-and-brown Solarian Almanac with my fingertips. With all the chaos, all the helplessness that surrounded us, it was undeniable that, through several days of experience, we had gained certainty on a few basic points on which a sea of ink had been wasted over the years, for they were &quot;Whether or not the ocean was a living thing might be doubted further by a lover of paradoxes and stubborn enough. But it was impossible to deny the existence of his psyche, whatever might be understood by that word. It was obvious that he saw our presence above each other all too well... This one statement destroyed the whole extended wing of solaristics, which claimed that the ocean was a &quot;world in itself&quot;, a &quot;being in itself&quot;, deprived by secondary atrophy of once-existing sense organs, that it knew nothing about existence of phenomena or external objects, locked in the wheel of gigantic mental currents, which His seat, bed, and maker is his swirling abyss under two suns. And further: we learned that it can synthesize artificially what we ourselves cannot - our bodies, and even improve them by introducing incomprehensible changes into their subatomic structure, probably related to the goals it was guided by. So he existed, lived, thought, acted; the chance of reducing the &quot;Solaris problem&quot; to nonsense or nothing, the notion that we were dealing with no Being, and therefore our defeat was by no means a defeat - all of these collapsed once and for all. Whether they wanted it or not, people now had to take note of a neighborhood that, though behind trillions of miles of vacuum, separated by light-years, lay in their paths of expansion, more difficult to grasp than the rest of the Universe. We may be at a turning point in history, I thought. even the dismantling of the Station itself, I did not consider impossible or even improbable, but I did not believe that anything could be saved in this way. The very existence of a thinking colossus will never give people peace again. Even if they cross the Galaxies, even if they bond with other civilizations of creatures similar to us, Solaris will be an eternal challenge to man eco. And another small leather-bound volume had wandered through the Almanac yearbooks. I stared at the finger-darkened cover for a moment before opening it. It was an old book, that Muntius Introduction to Solar Studies, I remembered the night I spent on it, and Gibarian&#39;s smile when he gave me his copy, and the terrestrial dawn at the window when I came to the word &quot;end&quot;. , the goal towards which it strives is as foggy and dark as the communion of saints or the descent of the Messiah. Exploration is a liturgy that exists in methodological formulas, the humble work of researchers is the expectation of fulfillment, of the Annunciation, because there are no and cannot be bridges between Solaris and the Earth. this one, as well as others: the lack of common experiences, the lack of concepts that could be communicated, are rejected by Solarists, just as the arguments that refuted the aftermath were rejected by believers. the foundation of their faith. What else do people expect, what can people expect after &quot;establishing informational contact&quot; with thinking seas? A register of experiences related to an existence that does not end in time, so old that it probably does not remember its own beginning? A description of desires, passions, hopes and sufferings, liberating themselves in the instant births of living mountains, the transformation of mathematics into existence, loneliness and resignation - fully? But all this is untransferable knowledge, and if you try to translate it into any of the earthly languages, all sought values and meanings will be lost, They will stay on the other side. Besides, it is not such revelations, worthy of poetics rather than science, that the &quot;followers&quot; expect, no, because they themselves are waiting for Revelations without realizing it, which would explain to them the meaning of man himself! So solaristics is a post-tomb of long-dead myths, an bloom of mystical longings that human lips dare not express openly, with full voice, and the cornerstone hidden deep in the foundations of its edifice is the hope of Redemption... But those unable to admit that it really is solarists carefully avoid any interpretation of Contact, so that it becomes something final in their writings - and while in the original, still sober understanding it was supposed to be a beginning, an introduction, entering a new path, one of many - beatified, after many years it became their eternity and heaven... Simple and bitter is the analysis of Muntius, this &quot;heretic&quot; of planetology, dazzling in its negation, in shattering the Solarian myth, or rather the Mission of Man. complete, ignorant silence, which was understandable, for accepting Muntius&#39;s words of solaristics as it existed. The beginnings of another, sober, resigning, waited in vain for their founder. Five years after Muntius&#39;s death, when his book had already become a bibliographic rarity, a white raven, not to be found either in Solarian collections or in philosophical book collections, a school named after him was established, the Norwegian circle, in which, broken on the individuality of the thinkers taking over his heritage, the calmness of his lecture turned into the biting, fierce irony of Erle Ennesson, and in a somewhat trivialized version, into utilitarian solaristics, or &quot;utilitarianism&quot; of Phaelanga; some fanciful striving for civilizational contact, for an intellectual communion of two civilizations, engendered by false hopes, but in the face of the merciless clarity of Muntius&#39;s analysis, the writings of all his spiritual disciples remain little more than contributory, if not mere popularization, with the exception of the works of Ennesson and maybe Takata, he&#39;s actually done the lice himself He called the first phase of solaristics - the period of &quot;prophets&quot;, which he included Giese, Holden, Sevada, the second he called &quot;the great schism&quot; - the disintegration of the only Solarian church into a bunch of warring confessions, and predicted a third phase - dogmatization and scholastic ossification, which will come when all that is to be explored has been explored. However, that did not happen. Gibarian, I thought, was right, however, in considering Muntius&#39; liquidation argument a monumental simplification, omitting everything that was contrary to the elements of faith in solaristics, because it was determined by the perpetual temporal nature of works, which promised nothing but a concrete, material globe orbiting two suns . Tucked into Muntius&#39;s book was a yellowed, folded double copy from the Parerga Solariana Quarterly, one of the first papers Gibarian had written before he took over as director of the Institute. such as an instruction to enumerate specific phenomena justifying the existence of real chances for Contact. Because Gibarian belonged to, probably, the last generation of researchers who had the courage to refer to the early years of splendor, optimism and did not deny a specific faith, crossing the boundaries set by science, as material as possible, because it trusted in the success of efforts, provided they were persistent and relentless enough . It came from the well-known, classic studies of Eurasian bioelectronics, Cho-En-Min, Ngyali and Kawakadze. They showed elements of similarity between the brain&#39;s electrical pattern and certain plasma discharges that precede the formation of such plasma formations as early-stage Polymorhas and twin Solarids. He rejected overly anthropomorphic interpretations, all those mystifying theses of the psychoanalytic, psychiatric, and neurophysiological schools that tried to interpret individual human diseases into the glial ocean, such as epilepsy (whose analogy was supposed to be the spasmodic eruptions of asymmetriads), because he was one of the heralds of Contact the most cautious and sober, and he hated nothing so much as the sensations which, it is true, very seldom accompanied this or that discovery. A wave of similar, cheapest interest was aroused by my diploma thesis. And there it was, unprinted, of course, somewhere in one of the microfilm trays. I based it on the revealing studies of Bergmann and Reynolds, who managed to isolate and &quot;filter&quot; out of the mosaic of color processes the components accompanying the strongest emotions - despair, pain, pleasure - and then I compared these records with the discharges of ocean currents and detected oscillations and profiling of the curves ( on certain parts of the bowl of symmetry-triads, at the base of immature mimoids, etc.) - displaying a remarkable analogy. This was enough to get my name soon in the tabloid press under clown titles like &quot;Jelly Despairs&quot; or &quot;Planet in Orgasm&quot; But it worked out (or so I thought until recently) to my advantage, because Gibarian, who, like any other solarist, did not read all the thousands of works that appeared, especially novices, drew my attention and I got a letter from him. one, and it opened a new chapter in my life.