The tubular corridor was empty. I stood in front of the closed door for a while, listening. The walls must have been thin, and the wind howled from outside. There was a slightly slanted, sloppy rectangular piece of plaster on the door panel with the word &quot;Man&quot; written in pencil. I stared at the scribbled word. I moved, and the unbearable weight of the suit bent my arms. Quietly, as if hiding from an unseen observer, I returned to the circular room with five doors. There were signs on them: Dr. Gibarian, Dr. Snaut, Dr. Sartorius. There was none on the fourth one. I hesitated. then I pressed the handle lightly and opened it slowly. As it swung open, I had the almost certain feeling that someone was there. I went in. There was no one there. The same, only slightly smaller, convex window, looking out at the ocean that here - against the sun, it shone greasy, as if red oil had flowed from the waves, and the crimson glare filled the whole room, like a ship&#39;s cabin. There were shelves with books, between them, strapped vertically to the wall, a bed was mounted on gimbals, on the other side there were many cupboards, between them hung on nickel frames aerial photographs glued together with strips, in metal holders flasks and test tubes plugged with cotton wool, under the window in two rows white enameled boxes were set up so that you could barely walk between them. Some had their lids swung open - they were full of tools, plastic hoses, there were faucets in both corners, a smoke extractor, freezer cabinets, the microscope was on the floor, there was no room for it on the big table next to the window. When I turned around, just by the front door, I saw a ceiling-high, open wardrobe full of coveralls, work and protective aprons, underwear on the shelves, aluminum bottles for portable oxygen machines gleaming between the tops of anti-radiation shoes. Two cameras with masks hung hooked to the rail of the raised bed. Everywhere was the same, only roughly, as if in a hurry, sloppy orderly chaos. I inhaled the air exploratively, detected a faint chemical odor and a hint of a pungent odor - was it chlorine? Instinctively, I searched with my eyes for the grilled air vents in the ceiling corners. Strips of paper stuck to their frames fanned gently as a sign that the compressors were working, maintaining normal air circulation. I moved the books, cameras, and tools from the two chairs to the corners, stuffing them as much as I could until there was a relatively empty space around the bed between the wardrobe and the shelves. I pulled up the rack to hang the suit on, grabbed the zipper pulls in my fingers, then let go. Somehow I couldn&#39;t decide to drop the suit, as if it would make me vulnerable. I took another look around the room, checked that the door was securely shut, and as there was no lock on it, after a brief hesitation I pushed the two heaviest boxes towards it. Having barricaded myself so makeshiftly, with three jerks I freed myself from my heavy, creaking shell. A narrow mirror on the inner surface of the wardrobe reflected part of the room. Out of the corner of my eye I caught a movement there, jumped up, but it was my own reflection. The leotard under the suit was sweaty. I dropped it and pushed the wardrobe. She stepped back, the walls of a miniature bathroom gleaming in the alcove behind her. There was a large, flat cassette on the floor under the ink. I carried her with difficulty to the room. As I placed it on the floor, the lid springed open, and I saw compartments filled with bizarre exhibits: tools caricatured or roughly sketched in dark metal, some analogous to those in the cupboards. They were all unusable, malformed, rounded, melted, as if taken from a fire. The strangest thing was that even the ceramic handles, which were practically infusible, had the same shape of damage. It is impossible to reach their incubation temperatures in any laboratory furnace - except inside an atomic pile. From the pocket of my draped suit I took a small ray tracer, but the black muzzle was silent as I held it close to the remains. I was only wearing briefs and a mesh t-shirt. I threw both on the floor like rags and jumped naked under the ink. The rush of water felt like relief. I writhed under the downpour of hard, hot streams, massaging my body, snorting, all somehow exaggerated, as if shaking, spewing out all that muddy, contagious uncertainty that filled the Station. I searched the closet for a light training suit that could also be worn under a suit, and pocketed all my meager possessions; between the pages of the notebook I felt something hard, it was the key to my earthly dwelling, I don&#39;t know how, which I turned in my fingers for a moment, not knowing what to do with it. I finally put it on the table. It occurred to me that I might need some kind of weapon. It certainly wasn&#39;t a universal penknife, but I didn&#39;t have anything else, and I wasn&#39;t in a state of mind yet to start looking for a ray-thrower or anything like that. I sat on a metal chair in the middle of the empty space, away from all things. I wanted to be alone. I was pleased to find that I still had over half an hour of time; it&#39;s hard, meticulousness in complying with all, no matter how important or insignificant, obligations is my nature. The hands on the twenty-four-hour dial stood at seven. The sun was setting. Seven o&#39;clock local time was the twentieth of the Prometheus deck. Solaris must have shrunk to the size of a spark on Moddard&#39;s screens, no different from stars. But what could I care about Prometheus? I closed my eyes. There was complete silence except for the meowing of the pipes at regular intervals. Water trickled softly in the bathroom, dripping onto the china. Gibarian was dead. If I understood what Snaut was saying correctly, only a few hours have passed since his death. What did they do with the body? Have they buried them? True, on this planet you couldn&#39;t do that. I thought about this matter-of-factly for a long time, as if the fate of the dead was the most important thing, until, realizing the nonsense of such thoughts, I got up and started walking diagonally across the room, nudging the scattered books with the tip of my foot, some small, empty duffel bag; I bent down and picked her up. It wasn&#39;t empty. It contained a bottle of dark glass, as light as if it had been blown out of paper. I looked through it at the window, at the darkly reddening last light of sunset, smoky with dirty mists. What was happening to me? Why did I deal with any nonsense, any unimportant trifle that fell into my hands? I jumped as the light came on. Of course, a photocell, sensitive to the approaching dusk. I was full of anticipation, the tension was building up to the point where I finally didn&#39;t want to have an empty space behind me. I decided to fight it. I pulled the chair up to the shelves. I pulled out the all-too-familiar second volume of Hughes and Eugel&#39;s old monograph, Historia Solaris, and began to leaf through it, propping the thick, stiff spine on my knee. Solaris was discovered nearly a century before I was born. The planet revolves around two suns, a red one. No ship had come close to it in over forty years. In those days, Gamow-Shapley&#39;s theory of the impossibility of life on double star planets was taken for granted. The orbits of such planets are constantly changing due to the gravitational The resulting perturbations alternately contract and stretch the planet&#39;s orbit, and the primordials of life, if they arise, are destroyed by radiant heat or icy cold. millions, if not billions of years) - in a very short time. Solaris had, according to the original By these calculations, in five hundred thousand years, to come within half an astronomical unit of its red sun, and after another million, to fall into its scorching abyss. But after a dozen or so years, it was discovered that its track did not show the expected changes, as if it were constant, as constant as the trajectories of the planets of our solar system. Observations and calculations were repeated, now with the highest accuracy, which only confirmed what was known: that Solaris has an unstable orbit. From one of several hundred planets discovered every year, which are included in great statistics with a few lines of notes detailing the elements of their motion, Solaris then advanced to the rank of a body worthy of special attention. In fact, four years after this discovery, it was circled by Otenskjold&#39;s expedition, which explored the planet from Laocoön and two accompanying auxiliary ships. This expedition had the character of a makeshift, improvised reconnaissance, the more so that it was unable to land. It introduced into equatorial and polar orbits a greater number of automatic observer satellites, whose main task was to measure gravitational potentials. In addition, the surface of the planet, almost entirely covered by the ocean, and the few plateaus rising above its level were explored. Their total area does not match the area of Europe, although Solaris is twenty percent larger than Earth in diameter. These patches of rocky and desert land, scattered irregularly, are concentrated mainly in the southern hemisphere. They also determined the composition of the oxygen-free atmosphere and made very precise measurements of the planet&#39;s density, as well as albeda and other astronomical elements. As expected, no signs of life were found either on land or in the ocean. Over the next ten years, Solaris, now at the center of the attention of all observatories in the region, showed an astonishing tendency to maintain its gravitationally unstable orbit beyond any doubt. For some time the case smacked of scandal, because the blame for this result of observations was tried to be blamed (for the sake of the good of science) either on certain people or on the calculating machines they used. Lack of funds delayed the actual launch of the Solar Expedition for another three years, until Shannahan, having completed the crew, obtained three Spaceport Class C-class vessels from the Institute. A year and a half before the arrival of the expedition that launched from the area of alpha Aquarius, the second exploration fleet, on behalf of the Institute, launched the robotic satellite Luna 247 into circumsolar orbit. This satellite, after three successive reconstructions, separated by decades, has been working to this day. The data he collected finally confirmed the observation of the Otenskjold expedition about the active nature of the ocean&#39;s movements. One of Shannahan&#39;s ships remained in high orbit, while two landed after preliminary preparations on a rocky patch of land that covers about six hundred square miles at the south pole of Solaris. The expedition&#39;s work ended after eighteen months, proceeding successfully, except for one mishap caused by malfunctioning apparatus. Within the scientific team, however, there was a split into two opposing camps. The subject of the dispute became the ocean. Based on analyzes, it was recognized as an organic creation (nobody dared to call it alive at that time). However, when the biologists saw in it a primitive formation - a kind of gigantic assemblage, so as if one, monstrous in its growth, liquid cell (but they called it &quot;prebiological formation&quot;), which surrounded the entire globe with a gelatinous mantle, with a depth of in places of several miles - astronomers and physicists argued that it must be an extremely highly organized structure, perhaps beating terrestrial organisms with the complexity of its construction, since it can actively influence the shaping of the planetary orbit. and, in addition, planetary physicists have discovered a connection between certain processes in the plasma ocean and the locally measured gravitational potential, which varied according to the ocean&#39;s &quot;metabolism.&quot; Thus, physicists, not biologists, coined the paradoxical expression &quot;plasma machine&quot;, meaning a creature, in our sense, perhaps not animate, but capable of undertaking deliberate actions on a - let us add at once - astronomical scale. attracted all the eminent authorities within weeks, the Gamow-Shapley doctrine wavered for the first time in eighty years. For some time, attempts were made to defend it by claiming that the ocean had nothing to do with life, that it was not even a creation of &quot;para-&quot; or &quot;prebiological&quot;, but a geological formation, probably unusual, but capable only of perpetuating the orbit of Solaris by changing the force of gravity; Le Chatelier&#39;s rule was invoked. that the ocean is the result of a dialectical development: from its primordial form, from the primeval ocean, a solution of lazily reacting chemical under the pressure of conditions (that is, changes in its orbit that threaten its very existence), without the mediation of all terrestrial stages of development, so bypassing the origin of unicellular and multicellular organisms, vegetable and animal evolution, without the birth of the nervous system, the brain, jump immediately to the stage of &quot;ocean homeostatic.&quot; In other words, it did not adapt like terrestrial organisms to the environment for hundreds of millions of years, only after such a huge time to give rise to a rational race, but it mastered its environment at once. It was not original at all, except that still no one knew how a syrupy jelly could stabilize the orbit of a celestial body. Devices that created artificial force and gravitational fields - gravitors - had been known for almost a century, but no one had even imagined how the result, which in gravitors was the result of complex nuclear reactions and extreme temperatures, could be achieved by amorphous goo. The newspapers, then choked to the curiosity of readers and to the horror of scientists with the most indiscriminate inventions about the &quot;secret of Solaris&quot;, there were also such claims that the planetary ocean is ... a distant relative of the Earth&#39;s electric eels. to unravel, it turned out that the explanation, as it often happened with Solaris, replaced one puzzle with another, perhaps even more astonishing. can directly model the space-time metric, which leads, among other things, to deviations in the measurement of time on one and the same Solaris meridian.So the ocean not only knew in a sense, but was even able (what can not be said about us) to use the consequences of the Einstein-Boe theory With this said, one of the most violent storms of our time broke out in the scientific world. for centuries. The most venerable theories universally accepted as true were crumbling, the most heretical articles appeared in the scientific literature, and the alternatives &quot;genius ocean&quot; or &quot;gravitational jelly&quot; fired all minds. All this happened a good dozen years before I was born. When I was in school, Solaris, due to the facts I learned later, was already universally recognized as a planet endowed with life - but with only one inhabitant ... The second volume of Hughes and Eugel, which I still leafed through almost mindlessly, began with a systematic, as original as what a fun thought. The classification table presented in turn: Type - Polytheria, Order - Syncytialia, Class - Metamorpha. It was as if we knew God knows how many specimens of a species, when in fact there was still only one, albeit weighing seventeen trillion tons. Colorful diagrams, color charts, analyzes and spectral spectra flew under my fingers, demonstrating the type and rate of the basic transformation and its chemical reactions. The further I delved into the bulky volume, the more math flitted through the chalky pages; one might have thought our knowledge of this Metamorpha-class who lay shrouded in the darkness of a four-hour night several hundred meters below the station&#39;s steel floor was complete. In fact, not everyone was yet in agreement as to whether this was a &quot;being,&quot; let alone whether the ocean could be called rational. I snapped the great volume on the shelf and brought out another. a summary of the experimental protocols of all those countless endeavors aimed at making contact with the ocean. The second part of the volume, almost 1,300 pages, was occupied only by the bibliography of the subject. The original literature would certainly not have fit in the room I was sitting in. The first attempts at contact were made through special electronic devices transforming stimuli, sent back and forth, and Ocean took nudes along the way significant part in shaping these apparatuses. But all this happened in complete darkness. What did he mean by &quot;participated?&quot; He modified certain elements of the devices that were immersed in it, so that the recorded rhythms of the discharges changed, the recording devices recorded a multitude of signals, as if they were shreds of some huge operation of higher analysis, but what did it all mean? the ocean&#39;s momentary state of excitation? Perhaps the impulses that gave rise to its enormous creations, somewhere, thousands of miles away? Perhaps, translated into inscrutable electronic constructs, reflections of the eternal truths of this ocean? Perhaps its works of art? Who could know, since it was impossible to obtain two times the same reaction to a stimulus? When the response was once an explosion of impulses almost bursting the apparatus, and once a dead silence? Since no experience was possible to repeat? It still seemed that we were one step away from deciphering this ever-expanding sea of records; after all, it was for this purpose that electronic brains with processing power were built and information that no problem has ever required. Indeed, some results have been obtained. The ocean - the source of electric, magnetic, gravitational impulses - spoke as if the language of mathematics; certain sequences of its current discharges could be classified by the most abstract branches of terrestrial analysis, set theory, and there appeared homologues of structures known from that branch of physics that deals with the relationship of energy and matter, finite and infinite quantities, particles and fields - all this led scientists to believe that they were facing a thinking monster, that it was a kind of millions of times larger, encircling the entire planet, protoplasmic sea-brain, consuming time with amazing in its scope theoretical considerations about the essence of all things, and all this what our cameras pick up are tiny, accidentally overheard fragments of that gigantic monologue that goes on forever in the depths, beyond our comprehension. So many mathematicians. Such hypotheses were described by some as an expression of disregard for human capabilities, as prostration before something we do not yet understand, but which can be understood as unearthing the old doctrine of &quot;ignoramus et ignorabinius&quot; from the grave; harmful and idle tales that in these hypotheses of mathematicians the mythology of our times manifests itself, seeing in a giant brain - electronic or plasma, it is all the same - the highest goal of existence - the summa of being. And others ... but there were legions of researchers and views. Well besides, it was a whole field of trying to &quot;get in touch&quot; compared to other branches of solaristics where specialization had gone so far, especially in the last quarter of a century, that the solarist-cyberneticist could hardly communicate with the solarist-simelriadologist. &quot;How can you communicate with the ocean if you can&#39;t communicate with each other anymore?&quot; asked Veubeke, who was then, during my studies, the director of the Institute, jokingly asked; there was a lot of truth in this joke. Its undulating surface could give rise to the most different, unlike anything earthly forms, the purpose - adaptive, cognitive or whatever - of these sometimes violent eruptions of plasmic &quot;creativity&quot; was a complete mystery. As I put the volume, so heavy I had to hold it with both hands, on the shelf, I thought that our knowledge of Solaris that fills libraries is a useless ballast and quagmire of facts, and we are in the same place where it began to be collected seventy-eight years ago. in fact, the situation was much worse, because all the effort of those years turned out to be in vain. What we knew exactly consisted of nothing but denials. The ocean did not use or build machines, though it seemed able to do so under certain circumstances, for it duplicated parts of some of the apparatus submerged in it, but it did so only in the first and second years of exploration; then he ignored all repeated attempts with Benedictine patience, as if he had lost all interest in our devices and products (and it would appear that also in us ...). It possessed - I continue the enumeration of our &quot;negative news&quot; - no nervous system, no cells, no protein-like structure; it did not always react to stimuli, even the most powerful ones (for example, it completely &quot;ignored&quot; the crash of Giese&#39;s second expedition&#39;s auxiliary rocket ship, which crashed from a height of three hundred kilometers to the surface of the planet, destroying the plasma within a mile and a half with the nuclear explosion of their atomic piles). Slowly, in the circles of scientists, the &quot;Solaris case&quot; began to sound like a &quot;lost cause&quot;, especially in the spheres of the Institute&#39;s scientific administration, where voices have been raised in recent years demanding a cut in subsidies for further research. No one has dared to talk about the complete liquidation of the Station; that would be too blatant an admission of defeat. Anyway, some people said in private conversations that all we needed was a strategy of &quot;honourable&quot; withdrawal from the &quot;Solaris affair&quot;. ; But for many, especially the young, the &quot;affair&quot; gradually became something of a touchstone of self-worth: &quot;in fact,&quot; they said, &quot;there is more at stake than the exploration of Solarian civilization, for the game is about ourselves, on the limits of human knowledge. For a time the popular view (disseminated zealously by the daily press) was that the thinking ocean that flows over all of Solaris was a gigantic brain, millions of years ahead of our civilization, that it was some sort of &quot;cosmic yoga,&quot; a sage, a form of omniscience that it has already understood the futility of any action and therefore maintains categorical silence towards us.. This was simply not true, because the living ocean works, and how else - only according to other than human ideas, it does not build cities or bridges or flying machines; nor does it try to conquer space or transcend it (some defenders of human superiority saw an invaluable asset for us at all costs), but deals with thousands of transformations - &quot;ontological auto-metamorphosis&quot;; there is no shortage of learned terms on the pages of solaristic works! Because, on the other hand, a man who stubbornly reads all possible Solarians has an overwhelming impression that he has before him fragments of intellectual constructions, perhaps brilliant, intermixed without order and composition with the fruits of some complete folly bordering on madness, it arose as the antithesis of the concept of &quot;ocean-yoga&quot; think of &quot;ocean-moron&quot;. These hypotheses brought from the grave and revived one of the oldest philosophical problems - the relation of matter and spirit, consciousness. It took a great deal of courage to for the first time, like du Haart, attribute consciousness to the ocean. This problem, hastily recognized by methodologists as metaphysical, smoldered at the bottom of almost all discussions and disputes. Is it possible to think without consciousness? But can the processes taking place in the ocean be called thinking? Is the mountain a very large stone? Is the planet a huge mountain? You can use these names, but the new size scale brings new regularities and new phenomena to the scene. This problem has become the square of the circle of our times. Every independent thinker has tried to contribute to the treasury of solaristics; theories proliferated that we were facing a product of degeneration, of regression following the past phase of the ocean&#39;s &quot;intellectual splendour,&quot; that the ocean was in fact a glial tumor that, having been born within the bodies of the planet&#39;s former inhabitants, , devoured them all and devoured them, fusing the remains into an everlasting, self-rejuvenating, supracellular element.In the white, earth-like fluorescent light, I took the cameras and books from the table, spread the map of Solaris on a plastic plate, and looked into it, resting his hands on the metal strips at the edges, the living ocean had its shallows and depths, its islands, tarnished with weathering minerals, testified that they had once been its bottom - did it also regulate the rise and fall of rock formations, submerged in my womb? It was completely dark. knowing, I don&#39;t know for the first time in my life, an astonishment as shocking as the first one I experienced when, as a boy, I learned at school about the existence of Solaris. I don&#39;t know how it happened that the surroundings with the mystery of Gibarian&#39;s death that lingered in them, that even my unknown future seemed unimportant to me, and I thought of nothing, lost in the study of this terrifying map for every man. The individual patches of life were named after the researchers who devoted themselves to their exploration. I was staring at the Thexalla Gleymass flowing around the equatorial archipelagos when I felt someone&#39;s gaze. I was still standing over the map, but I couldn&#39;t see it anymore, I was paralyzed. The door was right in front of me; they were piled with boxes and a cupboard pushed up to them. It&#39;s some sort of automaton, I thought, although there had never been one in the room before, and it couldn&#39;t have come in unnoticed by me. The skin on the back of my neck and back was beginning to sting, the feeling of heavy, fixed gaze becoming unbearable. I didn&#39;t realize that as I pulled my head into my arms, I leaned more and more against the table, which began to slide slowly across the floor; this movement seemed to set me free. I turned sharply. The room was empty. In front of me there was only blackness of a great semi-circular window. The impression did not go away. The darkness stared at me, formless, vast, eyeless, borderless. Not a single star illuminated the darkness beyond the windows. I drew the lightproof curtains. I hadn&#39;t even been to the station for an hour, and I was beginning to understand why there were cases of persecution mania there. I connected it instinctively with Gibarian&#39;s death. Knowing him, I had thought that nothing could disturb his mind. I&#39;m no longer sure. I was standing in the middle of the room next to the table. My breathing slowed down and I felt the sweat that had formed on my forehead cool down. What did I just think about? The truth - about slot machines. The fact that I did not encounter any in the corridor or in the rooms was very strange. Where have they all gone? The only one I came across - remotely - was for the mechanical maintenance of the airport. And others? I looked at my watch. Actually, I should go to Snaut&#39;s now. I left. The corridor was dimly lit by fluorescent lamps running from the ceiling. I passed two doors until I came to the one with Gibarian&#39;s name on it. I stood in front of them for a long time. Silence filled the station. I took the handle. I didn&#39;t really want to go in there at all. It buckled, the door slid back an inch, a crack, black for a moment, then a light came on. Now anyone walking down the hall could see me. I quickly crossed the threshold and closed the door behind me, soundlessly and firmly. Then I turned around. I was standing with my back almost touching the door. It was a room larger than mine, also with a panoramic window, three-quarters covered with a curtain, undoubtedly brought from Earth, not belonging to the Station&#39;s equipment, with small blue and pink flowers. Library shelves and cabinets lined the walls, both enamelled a very pale green with a silvery sheen. Their contents, piled on the floor in heaps, were piled up between stools and armchairs. Directly in front of me, two walking tables stood in front of me, toppled and embedded partly in the piles of magazines that tore from cracked folders. The open, fanning books were flooded with liquids from broken flasks and bottles with worn-in stoppers, most of them so thick-walled that a simple fall to the floor, even from a considerable height, would not have shattered them. Under the window lay an overturned desk with a broken work lamp on its reach arm; a stool lay in front of him, its two legs digging into the half-drawn drawers. A veritable flood of sheets, handwritten sheets, papers covered the entire floor. I recognized Gibarian&#39;s handwriting and bent over them. Picking up the loose sheets, I noticed that my hand casts not a single shadow, but a double one. I turned around. The pink curtain blazed as if lit at the top, a sharp line of fierce blue fire that expanded with each passing moment. I yanked the fabric to the side - eyes burned with a terrible fire. It occupied a third of the horizon. A thicket of long, eeriely stretched shadows ran along the hollows of the waves towards the Station. It was east. In the zone where the Station was located, the second blue sun of the planet entered the sky after an hour of night. The circuit breaker turned off the ceiling lights as I returned to the abandoned papers. I came across a succinct description of an experiment designed three weeks ago - Gibarian intended to expose plasma to very hard X-rays. I saw from the text that it was intended for Sartorius, who was to organize the experiment - I had a copy in my hand. The white sheets of paper were beginning to annoy me. The day that came was different from the previous one. Under the orange sky of the cooling sun, the ocean, inky with bloody gleams, was almost always covered with a dusty pink mist, melting the vault, the clouds, the waves - all of that was gone now. Even the light, filtered through the pink fabric, burned like the burner of a powerful quartz lamp. The tan of my hands turned almost gray in it. The whole room changed, everything that had had a red tint turned brown and faded to the color of liver, while the white, green, and yellow objects became sharper in color that they seemed to radiate a glow of their own. Squinting, I peered through a slit in the curtain: the sky was a white sea of fire, beneath which it trembled and quivered as if molten metal. I squeezed my eyes shut, red circles widening in my vision. On the console of the washbasin (its edge was shattered) I uncovered dark glasses that covered almost half of my face and put them on. The window curtain now burned like a sodium flame. I continued reading, picking up the sheets from the ground and placing them on the only unturned table. Some text was missing. There were reports of experiments already carried out. I learned from them that they had irradiated the ocean for four days at a point fourteen hundred miles northeast of its present location. All this took me by surprise, because the use of X-rays was prohibited by the UN Convention because of their deadly effects, and I was quite sure that no one had asked the Earth for permission for these experiments. At one point, raising my head, I saw my own reflection in the mirror of the open wardrobe door, a deathly white face with black glasses. The room was eerie, blazing with white and blue, but after a few minutes there was a prolonged grinding sound, and airtight flaps closed on the windows from the outside; the interior darkened and an artificial light came on, strangely pale now. It just got warmer until the steady tone coming from the air-conditioning ducts was like a strained whimper. The station&#39;s refrigeration equipment worked at full capacity. Even so, the dead heat continued to rise. Footsteps came to me. Someone was walking down the corridor. In two soundless steps I was at the door. The footsteps slowed and stopped. The one who walked stood outside the door. The handle slowly bent; without thinking, I instinctively grabbed it from my side and held it. The pressure did not increase, but it did not decrease either. The person on the other side of the door was just as silent, as if surprised. We held the doorknob for a good while. Then it snapped back suddenly in my hand - let loose, and a faint rustle told me it was leaving. I was still listening, but there was silence.